---
layout: post
title: "Medieval to Renaissance"
date: 2011-08-02 20:51:57 +0000
categories: ['European History']
---

**Medieval to Renaissance: Political, Social, and Economical Implications**

The fall of the Roman Empire marked the beginning of the decline of the Roman Catholic Church. In the midst of its decline, the Renaissance Era emerged. Shifting from the feudal societies so characteristic of the Middle Ages, the Renaissance societies grew politically, socially, and economically. In other words, the Renaissance Era did not so much reject medieval trends as it merely shifted from it, bringing to it its societies an empire more secular, intellectual, and diverse in trade.

The Renaissance Era found within its government, a more secular administration, drifting from the virtual theocracy that so dominated the Middle Ages. The Roman Empire, although not a theocracy as we know it with a priest as the head of the empire, nonetheless was a virtual theocracy in that it imposed Christianity as its state religion for most of its reign. With its decline in the 15th century, however, society turned its concerns to more intellectual movements, mainly, humanism. Influential humanists like Machiavelli, began to push for separation of religion from politics completely, establishing a rule based on the preservation and welfare of an empire rather than on religious interests. Absolute, or near-absolute, religious toleration among empires soon became predominant. However, religion was not rejected, as many believe, but merely pushed aside from the forefront. In fact, most humanists developed their theories in the backdrop of Christianity. Although separation of church and state was pressed for, and religious toleration prevalent, religious institutions still existed and were very much alive. We can see this in the political battles found in the Protestant and Catholic Reformations. These reformations did not call for the abolishment of religion but of its reformation, reinforcing the notion that the Renaissance merely shifted, or improved upon Medieval trends from the stagnant state it was to the active-minded and progress-driven society that came to be during the Renaissance.
This progress-driven society did not only reform politics with respect to religion, but also improved upon society's art and culture, altering the technique of art from gothic-perpendicular to realistic, yet nonetheless keeping in with the religious themes established during the Middle ages, demonstrating that the Renaissance society merely improved upon previous society rather than rejecting it completely. This can be seen in the growth of art adorning the Sistine Chapel: Botticelli's Trials of Moses, Michelangelo's Creation of Adam, and his Last Judgement. Other religious artworks include the Last Supper painted by, Leonardo Da Vinci and the many religious paintings Raphael worked on throughout his lifetime. The only difference between the religious art of the Renaissance Era and that of the Medieval Ages is its technique. Botticelli, Michelangelo, Leonardo Da Vinci, and Raphael all employed mechanical and technical methods to bring realism to realism and beauty to their art, whereas Medieval Art focused on loud, perpendicular lines, with hardly any realism. Botticelli used many curves and soft undertones to bring emotion to her subjects; Michelangelo mastered perspective in his frescoes, bringing life to them; Leonardo, most notably, worked with precise details in all his works, giving them very true-to-life depictions; and Raphael employed three-dimensional techniques to the events his artworks depicted, obtaining them connection with his audience. All of these artists improved upon the previously two-dimensional, flat and simply style of art that characterized the Medieval Ages into very alive and real depictions that captured the viewer's heart. The fundamental intent and usage of art however, to glorify, to reveal, to connect, remained the same. Thus, the artistic changes that took place during the Renaissance was more of an improvement to those of the Medieval Ages rather than an outright rejection. Society's improvement upon its art and culture, however, did not spontaneously occur; it was brought forth by the emerging emphasis on patronizing artists, and this only heightened when economic shifts took place at the dawn of the Renaissance.
Economic changes such as the increased emphasis on trade and infrastructural development took place when Medieval economy of farming became not rejected, but not longer viable, pressuring society to turn toward marketing and trade, and emperors toward taxing to improve trade center functions. We see this economic shift first in the north, in England, where the woolen cloth industry became a major commercial center for Europe. Following suit, the textile industry in Florence propelled the state to the foreground of European enterprise. It was these changes that shifted the emphasis from rural countryside to bustling cities, from independent farmers to interrelated trade and municipal increased taxing. This taxing allows monarchs and rulers to improve upon trade centers and ports. The Dutch most testifies to this with its Urban Expansion Plan in Holland, building of canals, creation of Dam Square in Amsterdam, and their Exchange Bank of Amsterdam. Known as leading commercial empire of its time, Dutch achieved its prosperity through infrastructural and municipal developments. The combination of increased taxing because of increased city-dwellers and the development of municipal functions both found themselves to be the impetus with which the Renaissance was catapulted into the political, social, and economic progress it came to be. Most importantly, these economic changes took place not because society rejected the Medieval economy, but built from it when the feudal economy became no longer viable.
Medieval Society, as we have come to see, was the basis for which political, social, and economic changes developed. From shifting society to a more secular focus, improving upon techniques of European art, to developing more productive and economically viable, interactive trade system. The Renaissance society was the sprouting of culture we see because of these changes. In a final analysis, it is clear that the initiation and peak of Renaissance was achieved not because society rejected its Medieval roots, but grew from them, allowing Europe to bloom into the Modern World.