---
layout: post
title: "The Soul Selects her own Society"
date: 2011-08-09 20:02:19 +0000
categories: ['English Literature']
---

**Explication: The Soul Selects her own Society – Emily Dickinson**
Humanity is innately snobby. The exclusion and snobbery may be directed toward ourself – narcissism, another human – infatuation, or groups within society – racism, classism, etc.. In The Soul Selects her own Society, Emily Dickinson explores the human inclination by openly expressing the natural tendency of some to label, categorize, include, and exclude. By highlighting her syntax and rhyme scheme, I come to discover this work as a powerful expression of imagery and hidden truths that is telling of a Soul that Selects her own Society. I will examine this work by order of its elements rather than of pure chronology.

The impressive syntactical structure of The Soul Selects her own Society creates a powerful expression of image pattern that is symbolic of a Soul selecting her own Society. In order to effectively highlight the pattern of imagery, the usage of syntax, the tone of certain words will be examined. In order, these are the tone words of Dickinson’s poem: soul, door, divine, obtrude, chariot, gate, emperor, mat, nation, one, valves, and stone. There is a pattern of imagery here that is but interrupted once, with “mat.” The Soul Selects her own Society alternates from divinity – soul, divine, chariot, emperor, nation, and valves – to an expression of closure – door, obtrude (no more), gate, one, and stone. The interruption of “mat,” a symbol of welcome, is used to represent the false welcoming appearance that some display but never intend on actually putting to practice. Through the use of divine imagery to that of closed doors, Emily Dickinson alludes to the speaker of the poem’s like for her own self rather than others; Her society is but her own beliefs and her own divine majority. This interpretation is backed by the repetition of “unmoved” by the speaker toward the emperor’s entrance. The speaker, stubborn and divine, will not take him in. Approaching the work through its rhyme scheme, I come to realize a similar interpretation.
The rhyme structure of this work, specifically the assonance and alliteration, when examined, can come to tell us the story of a Soul that selects herself as her society. The alliteration of S sounds can be found in the words comprising the subject of this poem: Soul, Selects, Society; the alliteration and assonance of the long O sounds describes the Soul: own, close, stone; and the alliteration of the N sounds describes her Society: nation, known, kneeling. Putting these together, I find that her Soul is her own, closed like stone, and her society is the nation she has known, kneeling before her. This creates an image of her “selecting” a society. As of right now, it is possible that this work means to portray “her” as someone who indeed selected someone and then closed “the valves of her attention,” but in further examining the half-rhymes and end rhymes, I come to find another hidden meaning, one that tells us she did not pick another soul, but chose herself to be her own society. The rhymes in the first and third stanzas are perfect, society with majority, nation to attention and so forth. There is an interruption, however, in the middle; pausing is only a slant rhyme to kneeling. This break indeed can create a feeling of suspense, but it also seems to allude to the false welcoming appearance mentioned earlier. The rhyme falsely passes itself off as a rhyme, when in reality, it is not a true rhyme. The middle stanza, then, of the “emperor is kneeling / Upon her mat” acts more as a misconception than of an attempt actually achieved. Taking all of this into account, the rhyme scheme of The Soul Selects her own Society expresses a Soul that selected her own as her own Society.
By examining both the pattern of imagery in the poem and its rhyme scheme, I realize Dickinson’s exploration and conclusion of humanity’s tendency to exclude, to be stubborn and choose her own to be her own society. The pattern of imagery alternates from divine to doors, demonstrating humanity’s innate snobbery; the rhyme scheme breaks down her poem to provide a hidden message that speaks much the same sentiment: we choose ourselves, our own beliefs to follow, and shut the door on everything else. Through our line by line analysis of the elements of this work, Dickinson’s message concerning human earthly disposition unveils.