---
layout: post
title: "Federalism: Cooperation Between National and Regional Systems"
date: 2011-07-17 20:45:31 +0000
categories: ['Government']
---

Filed under: GOVERNMENT, General Humanities
**Timed Essay 1hr **– Federalism: Cooperation Between National and Regional Systems
Federalism is used to describe a system of government in which sovereignty is constitutionally divided between central governing authority and constituent political units. Notice that “constitutionally” means by the constitution, rather than equally – what many falsely assume. Constitutionally, the Supremacy Clause dictates that the federal government is supreme in matters of Constitutional laws, federal laws, and treaties. States, however, are not completely powerless. Because of federalism, most significant programs in our country are state-run or state-controlled, lending our voice, represented by district representatives, more power in matters of policy. Because of federalism, both economic and social policy making are generally well-balanced, fair, and rational.

Economic policy-making within the United States ultimately falls under the authority of the Supreme Court, while economic policies themselves fall under the authority of federalism in our country, such can be found in the separation of taxing authority between federal and state governments. Taxes are determined by the branch of government funding the programs they are for. That is, both federal and states implement taxes, balancing the power and responsibility of funding our country. State-wise, taxes are enforced to ensure funding for municipal infrastructure, municipal protection (i.e. police department and fire department), quality of drinking water, and local representatives (i.e. congressmen and senators). All of these are state-run programs and works, so granting states authority to enforce funding for them gives states both fiscal and administrative control in carrying out these responsibilities. Likewise, the federal government implements tax for its own programs. Federally controlled programs include military, defense, international security, and national debt. However, the policy-making system is not so black and white. When a new policy calls for a new program, what determines whether that program is under the authority of the federal government or the state governments? The commerce clause in the Constitution is very vague, dictating that it is in the federal government's power to regulate “commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states, and with Indian tribes” (citation). The statement itself may be precise, but the meaning and interpretation of “commerce” is vague enough so that most new policies are assigned in accordance with a decision of the Supreme Court. Thus, economic policies are controlled by federal and state governments, while the Supreme Court, thought its power of judicial review regarding through Constitution, that holds highest authority over policy-making, that is, determine its constitutionality, how it can be applied, where it is assigned. It is only due to the vagueness of the commerce clause that the Supreme Court is granted this power; in other matters, specifically in regards to social welfare, it is the federal and state governments that control policy-making.
Because social-welfare, the act of redistributing wealth, is not found in the Constitution, it is up to not the Supreme Court, but the national and regional governments to determine policies and implement them. The ideal that federal and state governments rely on in their determination is federalism. This can be seen in our Social Security system today. The most obvious aspect of federalism in our the Social Security system is its, if allowed to put it that way, division of labor. While the federal government is in charge of funding the service, states are the systems controlling and implementing it. This evident cooperative federalism allows for a more interactive and united country. Instead of the federal government funding and running the service, as it used to around the New Deal, responsibility and controlled is shared between national and regional systems. Likewise, such a national and costing program would not run effectively if funded and controlled only by state governments. Practically, the federal government is better in terms of implementing a uniform tax to fund for such a nationally-eminent program, and the state government is better in terms of representing and understanding their region to implement such an important program. The division of labor according to ability and efficiency demonstrates the impact of federalism in social-welfare policy-making and control.
Federalism has allowed fair cooperation between national and regional system of governments. Because of federalism, not only are federal and state governments generally equal in power, but they are also both kept in check, thus standing against dictatorship or oligarchy. Despite media today, federalism is running a course very similar to that imagined by the writers of the Constitution, our founding fathers. I do not think policies would be as fair, or as decentralized and balanced in their legislation and control as they are today if it were not for the the concept of federalism.