---
layout: post
title: "The Poisonwood Bible &amp; The Awakening"
date: 2011-07-09 20:28:21 +0000
categories: ['English Literature']
---

**Female Freedom in The Poisonwood Bible and The Awakening**
Two women living in two separate worlds stumble upon the same calling.  Although Edna is from a wealthy home in New Orleans, and Orleanna from the poor and trying climate of Kilanga, both wind up seeking a similar independence.  Exactly how these disparate lifestyles found common ground lie in their husbands’ mannerisms.  Both husbands regarded women as objects, invoking a sense of injustice in their wives.  The sense prompted both women to contemplate their position in life.  Through contemplation, the women realized that they would stand this repression no longer.  In resolve of finding independence from their husbands, Edna and Orleanna leave behind the things and people that stifled their living.  Ultimately, both find themselves free from the chains of their repression.

Two husbands on opposite sides of world treat women as they treat objects, evoking indignation in their wives.  Already having shown annoyance of her company, Mr. Pontellier starts to leave, but before doing so, Chopin takes note of his remark, “‘You are burnt beyond recognition,’ [Mr. Pontellier] added, looking at his wife as one looks at a valuable piece of personal property which has suffered some damage” (Chopin, 7).  Here, Mr. Pontellier speaks to his wife in a condescending tone, treating at her as he would treat an object.  Her feeling of injustice is manifested later when she laughs at Robert, and contradicting Louisiana’s current law, tells him, “ I am no longer one of Mr. Pontellier's possessions to dispose of or not. I give myself where I choose” (Chopin, 42).  Here Edna asserts herself as under her own authority, and not her husband's.  Over the sea, in Kalinga, Mr. Price likewise regards his daughters as some sort of object, specifically, as land he owns.  In her recollection, Orleanna notes, “[f]or time and eternity there have been fathers like Nathan who simply see no way to have a daughter but to own her like a plot of land” (Kingsolver, 255).  Here Orleanna is referring to the Nathan’s insensitivity of the girls, and the senseless demands he makes of them.  Above all, she is referring to the domineering nature that society allows him, the power society gives him to abuse his daughters, make them “bend to his light” only to have them utterly depressed, “demanding with a world of indignation: How could you let him? Why?” (Kingsolver, 255-256).  Orleanna sees her husband's oppression of women and is indignant.  The injustice felt by both women toward their husbands pushed them to think deeply on their identity and how women should actually be treated.
In their contemplations, both women came to each their own realization of their unjustified repression.  Coming home from the beach, Chopin mentions, “In short, Mrs. Pontellier was beginning to realize her position in the universe as a human being, and to recognize her relations as an individual to the world within and about her” (Chopin, 17).  Evidenced here is Edna’s increased interest in her role in society, supporting the notion mentioned earlier that she questioned the fairness of her husband’s treatment.  After many days of such contemplation, Edna finds herself discontented, “[a]nd as she snuggled comfortably beneath the eiderdown a sense of restfulness invaded her, such as she had not known before” (Chopin, 78).  Here we can see that she is no longer ignorant of the patriarchal society surrounding her and is now disturbed by it.  Similarly, Orleanna realizes she should not mindlessly follow her husband, and she questions, “Here. Now. How in the world did a person get to be where I was?” (Kingsolver, 123).  She continues these string of questions until nearing the end of the story, Orleanna reveals her feelings living under her husband, “In perfect stillness, frankly, I've only found sorrow” (Kingsolver, 503).  In this statement, Orleanna is referring to her husband as stillness, for he was narrow-minded and rigid in his beliefs and practices.  Both women questioned the fairness of their husbands and came to each their own conclusions; surprisingly these conclusions are similar, reinforcing the notion of common ground shared by these otherwise disparate women.  Through contemplation, Edna realizes that society bends to favor men, and Orleanna begins to see her husband's oppressive character.  Both women find sorrow in their realizations and with determination, the two ladies resolve to relinquish themselves from the hold of their men and their societies.
By the power of their discontent and willingness to free themselves, Edna and Orleanna resolve to leave whatever it is that is stifling them.  In both cases, the women leave all material items and their husbands behind, in search of a true and raw freedom.  Before jumping into the sea, Edna, “[casted] the unpleasant, pricking garments from her, and for the first time in her life she stood naked in the open air, at the mercy of the sun, the breeze that beat upon her, and the waves that invited her” (Chopin, 120).  Edna fully expresses the extent of suffocation she suffered by the physical world she lived in.  In getting rid of her garments, Edna sends the message that she was repressed by the superficial world.  By shedding her clothes, she symbolically sheds the costume she had been wearing all her life, and is ready for the true freedom and independence the sea and beyond have to offer.  Just as heart-wrenching,  Orleanna embarks on an exodus upon the death of her youngest daughter, Ruth May.  On this Exodus, Orleanna brings only her children, noting, “[s]uch a bewildering excess of things we had for one single family, and how useless it all seemed now” (Kingsolver,  499).  The Price family had brought so many things to Africa, deeming them essential.  However, on their Exodus, they leave it all behind, realizing how useless those things really were.  This leaving behind of material items was symbolic of Orleanna’s leaving behind of her husband, and of her repression.  Just as Edna left behind her costume, Orleanna left behind her chains.  The two women now have left their oppressors.
Two mothers, two wives suffer by the patriarchal society.  Both began their lives mindlessly, impulsively following their husbands’ commands and submitting to their husbands’ treatment.  They then both sought to ponder on the justice of their society and their role.  Through contemplation, both realized the injustice of their repression and resolved to escape it.  It can even be argued that these two seemingly different, even polar lifestyles had more in common than in difference.  Perhaps the only strong difference between the two is that Edna left because of combination of subtle realizations whereas Orleanna left immediately upon Ruth May’s death.  Another difference is that for Edna, her oppressor were both her husband and her society, but with Orleanna, it was only her husband.  Nonetheless, these are small differences when their entire lives are taken into account.  Edna and Orleanna followed their oppressors, questioned them, found the same answer and escaped their oppressors.  When the two lives are juxtaposed up until Edna left, we come to see that the two sets of footprints by these two women nearly match.  Although there are two women, two lives, the two, for a long moment, shared a  common, liberating path.
** **
Works Cited
Chopin, Kate, and Margo Culley. The Awakening:  an authoritative text, biographical and historical contexts, criticism. 2nd ed. New York: W.W. Norton, 1994. Print.
Kingsolver, Barbara. The Poisonwood Bible:  a novel. New York: HarperPerennial, 19991998. Print.