---
layout: post
title: "Friction leading to the Cold War"
date: 2011-05-09 16:57:57 +0000
categories: ['U.S. History']
---

**Friction leading to the Cold War**

The Soviets and the Americans had emerged from the Second World War as the world’s strongest nations.  The war they had waged against one another after the Second World War was political, strategical, but above all, it was cold—as opposed to a hot war, one that consists mainly of confrontational combat.  There were three sources of friction that initiated and sustained this political conflict: differences in ideology, a push for expansionism from both sides, and the race for greater, stronger arms.

Communism, a belief that a nation would run smoothly only if the economic, political and social power were held by a single, authoritative government, was at its height during the Cold War era.  The Communist ideology was backed by the instability of economic booms and busts of the capitalistic economy and the widening financial gap in democratic nations.  Communism, in its purest form, presents a utopia where everyone is equal and where every good and capital is distributed equally.  In essence, it was equality.  Democratic nations however, believed communism to be totalitarian and a dictatorial.  A government for the people by the people was the heart of democracy.  America was not going to let countries fall, one by one, to a government that was not by the people.  This conflict in belief, in political systems, of what is just and how a country should be ran set the stage for the oncoming war between communist Soviets and democratic Americans.
The Soviet Union was not just a country that was communist, they were a country that wanted communism to spread.  They wanted satellite nations to surround their territory, to “protect” their country from forces like Germany.  Americans saw this as the Soviet’s attempt to spread communism, and they found reason to retaliate by enforcing  a policy of containment to “support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation”.  This policy is known as the Truman Doctrine.   Soviets may have tried to expand their communist powers through Southeast Asia, but Americans too were expanding during this period.  Their expansion was more concealed, and more economic; Americans were known for their economic expansionism, especially in Latin America during Roosevelt’s administration.  When Americans set up the Marshall Plan, it became clear that their policy was no different now as it was then.  The Marshall plan hit two birds with one stone.  It not only placed America at the top of the economic chain but it also helped contain communism, indirectly.  Americans believed that by helping war-torn or poverty-rife countries economically, they would soon thrive and not have to depend on communist dictators who feed off of helplessness.  With both sides pushing for expansionism, tensions increased.  This is exemplified in the Soviet’s refusal to participate in the Marshall Plan.  Even more so, when the United States formed the National Atlantic Treaty Organization, USSR countered with the Warsaw Pact.  It was clear the two nations wanted nothing to do with each other, but still wanted to expand across the rest of the world.  Time and time again, policies were failing or were being stalemated.  It seemed, the only way was to advance technologically.  It was here that the United States and the USSR began the silent arms race.
Americans had shown their advancement when they bombed Nagasaki and Hiroshima.  One could argue that their demonstration was not only to quickly end the world war, but also intimidate the Soviets to back down with their communist agenda.  Post-war however, there was a quiet-time in American nuclear weaponry.  It was during this time that Soviets developed Sputnik, and subsequently launched it into orbit.  Americans were surprised, in awe, and horrified at the technology produced by this totalitarian regime.  They were fearful of what might happen if the USSR were to apply this technology to nuclear or missile warfare.  This fear was justified when during Kennedy’s administration, Soviet missiles were found amassed in Cuba.  This incident, however, was effectively taken care of by John F. Kennedy, when he announced to the world his naval blockade of Cuba.  At this point, the arms race had escalated to such a height that both Khruschev and Kennedy realized a detente needed to be reached.  After removing the missiles from Cuba, Khruschev went so far as to denounce Stalin’s personality and his abuse of power.  Khruschev proclaimed he wanted to work to further his own society and government rather than compete with the United States over arms.  Unofficially, this announcement ended the arms race.  This was the first in a series of compromises and agreements that led to the end of the Cold War.
The differences in ideology created an almost irreversible rift between the United States and the USSR.  Expansionism then compounded that by creating near-confrontational conflicts in policy, economy, and society.  To protect its interests abroad, the U.S. established NATO, unto which the USSR responded with the Warsaw Pact.  This only stalemated the situation, frustrating both sides.  Frustration conferred itself into arms, and here began the arms race.  The two began intimidating one another, pushing the one another to give up.  The arms race was essentially a political war of attrition.  This race reached such a terrifying peak, however, that both leaders of democracy and communism found it time to work something out.  This realization paved way for the peace talks that would ensue, ending the political combat that was known as the Cold War.