---
layout: post
title: "Relationship Between Art and Science"
date: 2011-07-10 20:20:52 +0000
categories: ['European History']
---

**Relationship Between Art and Science During Italian Renaissance**
Art and Science are commonly pitted against each other, with implication that they are two separate, contrasting worlds. Ironically, from history up unto the present, art has actually stemmed from science. In history, during the Italian Renaissance, art itself was a form of calculated math and science. Of the present, music and quality of music - a form of art - is created by and dependent upon math and science.

Famous artists and painters from the Italian Renaissance period, such as Brunelleschi and Masaccio, have all incorporated the perspective techniques of scientific positioning and geometric three dimensionalism to exhibit life in their art. In Brunelleschi’s “The Peepshow” he paints the Baptistery onto a panel; it is a realistic painting of perspective. To prove this, he created a small hole in the center of his painting and faced the front of his painting towards the actual Baptistery. Holding a mirror to the front and looking through the peephole from the back, one would see his painting. Lowering the mirror whilst looking through the peephole, one would see the actual Baptistery. The differences between the actual Baptistery and his painting are so few that Brunelleschi’s work is considered the first ever accurate perspective painting of all time. In pursuit, Masacio’s first original work, “San Giovenale”, introduced a style of painting that is also often considered revolutionary. Masaccio created this painting using volumetric shapes in order to depict a three-dimensional solidity. “San Giovenale” typified medieval art with its significant shift from the common flat-style painting to the illusion-style painting of three-dimensions. Both artists, now renowned, created revolutionary artwork of their time using the outside forces of science and mathematics. Brunelleschi’s “The Peepshow” was accomplished through the scientific process by which the artist must continuously paint during a specific time of day whilst creating an equilibrium of angles and shapes. Similarly, Masacio’s “San Giovenale” portrayed an uncanny resemblance to  reality through its use of shadowing and angling to create volumetric shapes that powerfully duplicated the three-dimensional world. And so although it is commonly claimed that art is from the soul - the actual presentation and concretion of art is through science. If these painters and artists were to have used anything that their heart felt was right, with no background science, their paintings would not have turned out as gracious and simplistic. Seemingly ironic, art needs science to feel and be art.
The conviction that musicians are purely artists is mistaken; musicians are also mathematicians and scientists. Now the present day 21st century, music is extremely widespread and popular. Of this present day, most people consider music to be a form of art. It has been stated by music fanatics worldwide, the phrase, “the melody and harmony is beautiful; he is truly an artist.” Apparently musicians nowadays are only credited to half of their profession. Reality is, musicians are more than just artists, they are mathematicians and scientists as well. Around 500 B.C.’s, one of the first Greek mathematical thinkers, Pyhthagoras of Samos, came up with a connection between math and music. Pythagoras, commonly known for his “Pythagorean theorem”, was a man of ratios. He applied his ratio system onto a string of notes and quickly discovered that the ratios 1, 4/5, 2/3, 3/5, and 1/2 of the string all yielded the five simple Greek scale notes. An unknown follower of Pythagoras then applied the same ratios to each of the five notes , rather than the whole string, and found the seven notes surrounding this scale. The twelve note scale we have today was created through math. In another time period, German scientist Hermann Helmholtz was able to find the science behind why some harmonies are harmonic, and why others, are not. It is common understanding that the “A” note on a violin does not sound the same as the “A” not on a flute. The “A” note in its purest form is defined by 440 hertz. The “A” note on a full-scaled harmonic, such as the violin, however, will produce not only 440 hertz of A, but also 880 hertz of the tone but at half the volume, 1320 hertz of the tone by at a third of the volume, and so forth. Together, these hertz all form a tone that is defined by the note “A” on a full-scaled harmonic. Thus, the painful feeling encountered when someone is not necessarily singing on pitch is due to the fact that the singer is not hitting his strings at the right ratios. Music, then, is more complex than mere sounds. It is not created because musicians simply imagine it and will it, but it requires they have sufficient background knowledge in math and science in order to manipulate these sounds to make them pleasant. Thus, the tone of a song, the atmosphere of an instrument, and the arrangement of notes is not just an artistic process, but more often than not, a mathematical and scientific one. Without math and science, notes would not exist and sounds would have no basis. The world of music would then be a disarranged world of incoherent opinions regarding which sound harmonizes with which. All in all, the art was created by math and continues today through science.
The Italian Renaissance obtained its roots and revolutions from math and science and Pythagoras, a mathematician, and Helmholtz, a scientist, created the base of modern music. These correlations prove that world art is not separate from science, but stems from it. And that science, similarly, is not separate from the art, for it forms its base. It can then be concluded that the world of art and the world of science revolve on the same axis.