---
layout: post
title: "Kate Chopin On Exposing Hypocrisy"
date: 2011-06-22 20:16:21 +0000
categories: ['English Literature']
---

**Kate Chopin On Exposing Hypocrisy – Desiree's Baby**
Why do you look at the splinter in your brother's eye, and not notice the beam which is in your own eye?  At first glance, Desiree’s Baby by Kate Chopin tells of racism stronger than love.  However, that storyline is merely a diaphanous veil, lying over the real plot Chopin conveys.   Underneath, her message is intended for everyone, not just the whites, blacks, or women of her time.  Metaphorically, Desiree is an individual of unknown origin, an outsider, and Armand represents society.  Desiree’s Baby tells of a society that would ostracize any individual for a single fault, even when the society itself is riddled with corruption.  Chopin makes a point of hypocrisy in both Armand and the society of her time.

Despite all the cues that Armand may have been the mixed father, for not one moment did he look to himself.  In Desiree’s description of Armand’s manner since the baby was born, Chopin mentions “But Armand's dark, handsome face had not often been disfigured by frowns since the day he fell in love with her.” Armand is dark, whereas Kate mentions, “I am white! Look at my hair, it is brown; and my eyes are gray, Armand, you know they are gray. And my skin is fair," seizing his wrist. "Look at my hand; whiter than yours, Armand."  Here, Desiree defends herself, giving him all he should need to not doubt her racial background.  In the face of all this evidence, however, Armand is impervious, rigidly believing it is because of Desiree, and what she is that their baby resembles one of his slaves, not for a moment, turning an eye toward himself.  With this narrow-mindedness Armand condemns Desiree, committing outright hypocrisy.  When asked why the baby looks as he does, he responds that it is because “the child is not white” continuing, “it means that you are not white." Armand denounces Desiree with conviction and force, without even the awareness for doubt.
Similarly, like the American Antebellum society, countless times whites would deprecate blacks, asserting that they were barbaric, savage, and primitive, not once looking at who themselves the accusers had become.  In deriding an entire race, whites were savage themselves, merciless, and in not realizing this apparent hypocrisy, they were the ones of less than primordial thinking.  And despite the cries of slaves, despite that it was the slaves who taught slave-owners how to cultivate rice, that there were black who could learn and excel, the predominantly white society of Antebellum, and even of post-Antebellum period continued to point their fingers not inward, but outward, at the individuals of a suppressed race, just as Armand condemns Desiree, an individual of a suppressed gender.
The story of Desiree’s Baby, by Kate Chopin tells of an outright hypocrisy committed by a narrow-minded individual, of a corrupt society.  She emphasizes that those ostracized and oppressed were usually of minorities, or groups that since the start, had been suppressed by a white-male dominated society.  Here, Chopin writes a story that parallels the reality of her time, a time of outright racism and women submissiveness.  It is clear that Chopin puts hypocrisy in a bad light throughout this story, especially by ending her last scene with a sorrowful Armand and a telling letter.  In addition, perhaps Chopin is also trying to express a greater moral.  The idea that Armand of a high society turns out to be of African origin demonstrates that we may all be not that different from one another.