---
layout: post
title: "Despots During The Enlightenment"
date: 2011-07-19 20:35:44 +0000
categories: ['European History']
---

**Despots During The Enlightenment**
The Age of Enlightenment brought forth the age of reasoning that led to more efficient means of living. Religious control found itself more lenient, bureaucracy more centralized and functional, and education and agriculture beneficially reformed. Embracing these efficient means of living, Joseph II of Austria, Frederick the Great of Germany, and Catherine II of Russia rose to power. These “Enlightened” despots centralized their authority and modernized their respective territories by implementing social, political, and economic reforms.

Joseph II of Austria may not have been the most successful Enlightened despot, but he nonetheless tried to rule his territory with Enlightenment ideals. Josephism is the religious policy that allows for greater religious toleration and the invalidation of those institutions and customs that were against utiliarian principles, ideals of Enlightenment. His Edict of Tolerance gave Protestants equal status to Catholics and Jews more freedom than they had experienced in Austria. Politically, Joseph used the system outlined by Montesquieu, the Tripartite System of three, separated branches of government in establishing his own government consisting of administrative, fiscal, and judicial bureaucracy. These governments were politically close to the monarch, allowing Joseph II to centralize his authority. Following the same ideals, but achieving more success, Frederick the Great comes to reign over Germany.
Calling himself the “first servant of the state,” Frederick the Great made it his priority to serve his people by strengthening their country, centralizing his authority. Pursuing Enlightenment principles, Frederick socially, politically, and economically reformed his state. Frederick first implemented general education rules and universal religious toleration, supporting the growing trend of reason over religious control; he then reformed the legal process of his country by outlawing torture and granting freedom of the press; and finally, he improved the economic state of his country by funding the construction of towns and roads in his agricultural reforms. By reason, he kept his citizens happy to encourage a cooperative, unified state. Politically, his system of bureaucracy, consolidating nobles, centralized his authority, embracing Enlightened Absolutism. Although a women, Catherine the Great, too, was able to achieve much of the reforms Frederick had.
Ruler of Russia, Catherine the Great sought to reform her state socially, politically, and economically, affirming her role as an Enlightened Monarch.  Catherine the Great was a humble leader, and rejected the title of “the Great” established by her predecessor, Peter the Great. Catherine II also did not agree with the forcefulness that her predecessor, her husband had used. So instead of forcefully westernizing Russia as Peter had, Catherine pursued reforms that would benefit individuals, bringing her citizens more happiness, promoting cooperativity, productivity, and unification. Socially, she assertively encouraged education fro the nobles and middle class; politically, she discouraged censorship law; and economically, she encouraged Russia’s development of agriculture and industry. Russia was ushered in as a powerful force in the modern world because of Catherine’s Great leadership - that of Enlightened Absolutism.