---
layout: post
title: "The Progressive Movement"
date: 2011-05-09 17:06:09 +0000
categories: ['U.S. History']
---

**The Progressive Movement: Contributions by Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Woodrow Wilson**
The progressive movement was really the consequence of the growing desire of middle-class U.S. citizens to reform the society in general.  However, Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Woodrow Wilson contributed mostly to the progressive movement through balancing the power between business and unions.  Roosevelt is known for his Square Deal, where he introduced the concept of trust-busting and coming to the aid of unions; Taft is known for being the least progressive for although he continued Roosevelt’s precedence of trust-busting, he also raised tariffs and championed conservatives, garnering opposition from the Progressives.  Finally, Wilson is known for his New Freedom where by reducing tariffs, taking Americans off the gold-standard and passing a stronger antitrust law, he epitomizes the ideologies of the progressive movement.

Roosevelt’s policies fall under an umbrella labeled the “Square Deal”. Throughout his presidency, he was known for breaking down “bad trusts” while keeping good ones and mediating a dispute between a union leader and industry owner, that is to say, effect a “Square Deal.”  Although an antitrust act had been passed prior to Roosevelt’s administration, he was the first to actually refer to it during his administration.  Notable trust-busting that Roosevelt partook in were the break-up of the Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Company and Morgon’s Northern Securities Company.  Taking it one step further, Roosevelt stepped in during the Anthracite Coal Strike of 1902 and actually pulled both the union leader and the coal mine owner together and mediated their dispute.  This unprecedented action was applauded by progressives and was a major contribution to the progressive movement.  Succeeding him was William Howard Taft, a man who served only one term because he did not contribute much to the progressive movement.
Although Taft was elected through Roosevelt’s recommendation, he turned out going against most of Roosevelt’s ideologies.  While Roosevelt kept the good trusts around, Taft turned out busting almost any trust he saw—including those Roosevelt had saved.  Even more so, Taft passed the Payne Aldrich Tariff, which actually increased tariffs, going against progressive goals.  The last straw that really alienated Taft from progressives was his fast championing of Speaker of the House Joe Cannon, who was a conservative, and even fired Roosevelt’s progressive and conservationist, Gifford Pinchot when Pinchot criticized Cannon.  Taft’s reward in going against Roosevelt and his progressive party was denial of renomination.  Wilson was subsequently elected after Taft had only served one term.
Tired of Taft’s failure, progressives elected a strong and liberal leader, Woodrow Wilson to lead the nation.  Wilson’s policies were labeled “New Freedom” and he pulled the nation back to progressivism.  His first call of duty was to reduce the tariff that Taft had so hatefully increased.  Addressing the other two major progressive proposals, Wilson took the country off the Gold-standard and replaced it with Federal reserve notes.  Finally, to permanently ensure that trusts always be checked—and not only when a progressive president is around to do the trust-busting— Wilson passed the Clayton Antitrust act.  This act was more effectively written to keep trusts in check.  Strengthening the progressive movement, Wilson passes the Federal Farm Loan Act and the Child Labor Act.  By addressing almost all concerns of the progressive party, Wilson had launched the country full force into the progressive movement.
Progressive policies were initiated by Roosevelt, interrupted by Taft and strengthened by Wilson.  Through the Square Deal, Federal Farm Loan Act, Child Labors Act and Clayton Antitrust Act, Progressivism balanced the power struggle between big businesses and laborers.  In essence, Progressivism uprooted Americans and enabled them to wander on their own, and reform society where they saw fit.