---
layout: post
title: "Cultural Misunderstandings: A Passage to India by E. M. Forster"
date: 2011-08-22 21:13:06 +0000
categories: ['English Literature']
---

**Cultural Misunderstandings (Linguistic): A Passage to India by E. M. Forster**
Language has traversed distinct niches corresponding to different cultures. To some cultures, language is the vehicle to bring a message across; to others, language is the passenger itself, intended to be taken in directly. Within Passage to India by E. M. Forster, the difference in use of language is highlighted by the misunderstandings that arise between English and Indian cultures. Adela and Mrs. Moore taking Aziz’s invitation literally and Adela’s sexual assault accusation both show how misunderstandings arise when two cultures of differing interpretation systems collide, the literal and direct manner of the English and the mood and atmosphere-centered manner of the Indians.

Upon reaching Fielding’s dinner table, Adela and Mrs. Moore are disappointed that their carriage never arrived, prompting Aziz to denounce the Bhattacharyas absence and invite the ladies to his own, to which Adela takes literally, causing a misunderstanding between Aziz’s intentions and Adela’s interpretation. In reply to the ladies’ disappointment with their carriage situation, Aziz invites them all to his own place, claiming that there would be no “muddle when you come to see me.” To this, the omniscient narrator informs us of the ladies’ thoughts, describing Mrs. Moore’s surprise at his hospitality and Miss Quested’s like for adventure, both accepting Aziz’s invitation. To their acceptance, Aziz thinks “of his bungalow with horror” (Forster, 29). The misunderstanding that was just caused resulted from that of misinterpretation of Aziz’s words by the ladies. Bringing with them their English perspective of language, Mrs. Moore and Miss Quested interpreted Aziz’s word as literal, as a very real invitation for them to his home. Consequently, they accept. However, in Indian culture, Aziz’s words were merely meant to create a mood of hospitality, to express his concern and his politeness in addressing the ladies’ disappointment. He did not intend to actually invite them, but to merely create the mood of problem and resolve within Fielding’s home. The misinterpretation between Aziz and the ladies is chiefly due to their differing cultures, the atmosphere-centered role of language with the Indians and the literal and direct role of language with the English. A similar misinterpretation occurs again later, this time of bigger magnitude.
Between Adela and the Marbara caves a misunderstanding arises when the definite interpretation style of the English confront the atmospheric-centered mood of the caves, confusing Adela into claiming Aziz had sexually advanced upon her. While in the caves, Adela contemplates her life and realizes that she is not in love with Ronny and laments their lack of physical charm. At this point, Adela thinks to herself “a handsome little Oriental he was” with regards to Aziz and decides to ask whether Aziz has multiple wives. To this Aziz feels rudely addressed and ducks into a cave. Adela, unknowingly, ducks into a different cave (Forster, 66). Upon reaching the outside and returning home, Adela mysteriously claims she was sexually assaulted in the cave, and by Aziz (Forster, 71). As it turns out, however, on court day, Adela finds herself mistaken and withdraws all her charges (Forster, 100). Adela’s misinterpretation of what exactly happened within those caves can be traced back to her conversation with Aziz. While talking to him, she had remarked within her own mind that he was handsome and asked about polygamy, creating an almost sexual atmosphere. Although the atmosphere is present, we later learn that no one was really around her. Interpreting this atmosphere however, Adela uses what she has, the English manner of direct and literal interpretation, and she transforms the sexual atmosphere into a sexual assault, to which she applies Aziz the blame. The intangible and indefinite atmosphere of the Marbara caves, of India, confused Adela, an English women who was only used to interpreting matters very literally and definitively. This discrepancy between the Indian mountains and her own mode of interpretation, pulling word from tone, tangible from intangible, was what caused this misunderstanding.
From Adela and Mrs. Moore’s misinterpretation of Aziz’s invitation to Adela’s accusation of sexual assault, we find that misinterpretations are prone when cultures of differing interpretation systems collide. The ladies had misinterpreted Aziz’s invitation as a real invitation rather than a polite, mood-setting gesture and Adela transformed the sexual atmosphere around her into a sexual assault incident because of this clash in cultures. Passage to India depicts the well-intentioned but nonetheless rude effects of cross-culture interaction. In a way, the novel speaks to us, calling us all to be open-minded of other cultures and of misunderstandings that may arise, and maybe, learn as much we can of a culture before visiting - or in the case with the English - overseeing another country. If the English had understood the interpretation mode of the Indians, most of the incidents within this novel would not have taken place and a majority of the problems, such as that between Aziz and Adela, would not have arisen. The relationship between the Indians and the English, consequently, may have been much better off.