---
layout: post
title: "Economic Booms"
date: 2011-05-09 16:34:05 +0000
categories: ['U.S. History']
---

**1920's v. 1960's: Economic Booms**
Marcus Garvey reincarnates to walk the Earth as Malcom X, Seneca Falls finds new life in the feminist movement, and counter-culture flappers’ cigarettes are replaced by the hippies' methamphetamine.  The analogs between the cultural movement and culture of the 1920’s and 1960’s are uncanny.  The motivation that these two decades share is simple and straightforward: the economic boom of their time.  During the decades of economic prosperity, the general mass were enabled to look beyond financial survival: individuals generally had more than they needed so had the opportunity to address other concerns within society, most popularly civil rights.  Sometimes, individuals even sought a new form of society, as they deem the existing one too backward; these individuals formed the counter-culture society.  In the 1920’s and 1960’s, the counter-culture individuals were the flappers and the hippies, respectively.  When people weren't fighting to survive, they were fighting for rights and shifting culture.

In the 1920’s, the women’s rights movements fought for the right to vote.  During the time they could not vote, women’s rights societies fought for prohibition and many other reforms.  When they did gain their vote with the 19th amendment in 1920, the strength of the movement diminished.  That is to say, they only stopped fighting because they succeeded in gaining what they fought for.  However, after living with suffrage for several decades, women realized that suffrage was not everything they needed to fight for.  The increased percentage of women in the work force during the 1950’s and 1960’s increased the attention paid to equal opportunity and equal pay.  Betty Friedan’s Feminine Mystique really brought out the “problem  that has no name” to the forefront of reforms.  She spoke of the stifling nature of a domestic women, and the limited opportunities that bright young women were offered.  The feminist movement really felt power during the 1960’s because of writers like Friedan.  Working towards equal civil rights for women, however, goes hand in hand with the strife for African American civil rights.
Marcus Garvey called upon blacks to return to Africa, using black nationalism and pride as his rhetoric.  A disciple of Garvey, Malcom X’s father greatly influenced his son.  Malcom X advocated an even more radical black pride, a return to black ancestry and a non-American identity.  He opposed integration and any sort of identification with whites.  He even pointed out that the white liberals who supposedly claimed alliance with blacks for civil rights, really were against him.  He asserted they were chiefly part of the Democratic party and that this party was the same southern sectionalist party that was dominated by southern segregationists.  Marcus Garvey and Malcom X were both radical civil rights leaders of their time that advocated black pride.  In a sense, this black pride was a counter-culture movement, away from the movement toward integration by W.E.B. Du Bois and Martin Luther King Jr.  It is possible that this minority counter-culture movement set the stage for the nation-wide culture wars that erupted in both the 1920’s and the 1960’s.
The flappers of the 1920’s did not so much wage a political war toward the government, as the hippies did in the 1960’s, but instead they waged a social war against the culture of their time.  They went against the norm of society, wore and did things that were not deemed apt for women of the time.  A social war is just as significant as a political war, as it changes both the mindset and lifestyle of the people living in that age.  Flappers encouraged women to be strong and vigorous.  Flappers set the trend for short haircuts, smoking cigarettes, and intense dancing, launching middle class women into a social revolution.  Under the same counter-culture agenda, the hippies of the 1960’s campaigned against the Vietnam War and for racial equality.  They did this through active campaigning, urban reforms, and forming Utopian communes in which there was equality and peace among whites and blacks and without war.  Like the flappers, hippies resorted to drugs most of the time and encouraged behavior that rebuked the traditions set by their elders.  Although hippies attempted a political agenda, it is undeniable that they had also set a social revolution in their nation. The flappers of the roaring twenties and the hippies of the 60’s both impacted their societies by refuting traditions and traveling against the wave, the norm of their time.
There are many connections that can be made between the 1920’s and the 1960’s.  Moreover, even more connections can be made between the movements in each decade.  The women’s rights movement, the black nationalism movement and the age of culture wars were all in essence culture wars!  Women had to travel out of their domestic position to fight for greater equality to vote, and to receive equal pay.  Black radical leaders rose up from their niche in society to attack the foundations of America and empower their race and culture.  Flappers and hippies sought to express themselves fully, even if it meant going against the traditions set by their past.  It was these two periods of significant economic boom that were the breeding ground for American counter-culture empowerment.