---
layout: post
title: "History of Calculus"
date: 2011-07-20 20:59:07 +0000
categories: ['Calculus']
---

**History of Calculus (Non-rigorous)**
Calculus describes the universe. Conceptually, the discipline of Calculus is in many ways similar to our understanding of the Universe. Like the Universe, the relationships in Calculus have always been there; the foundation of the discipline required us to discover and understand these relationships, just as we have been discovering and understanding more and more of the universe. In other words, Calculus is not static text, but a still-developing discipline. Therefore, the present is the history of Calculus of the future; there is no real “foundation” of Calculus, but a series of of discoveries that accumulated, lending us the branch of mathematics today. Up to the present, mathematicians that have discovered the fundamental topics of Calculus include Pythagoras, Archimedes, and Newton.

Pythagoras and his colleagues discovered triangular relationships and irrational numbers and established the system of mathematical proofing. The concept we famously, or infamously know and use today - the pythagorean theorem, was developed by Pythagoraas and his colleagues around 500 BC. So long ago discovered yet so often used to today testifies to Pythagoras’s contribution as fundamental to Calculus. Likewise, the discovery he and his colleagues made of irrational numbers and the establishment of mathematical proofing can be seen to exist prevalently today, specifically used in Calculus in the form of pi and e and Calculus proofs respectively. Our use of pi and e can at first be taken for granted, until we realize how mind boggling it is to actually discover the abstract existence of irrational numbers. Pi and e are numbers that don’t end, values that can’t really be recreated; we can’t say that this table is pi inches. However, we can make relations between pi and circles to squares, and in this, Pythagoras’s and his colleague’s discovery of rational numbers allowed. In addition, mathematical proofing is so elemental to Calculus that one can argue Calculus is but many stems of proofs of a relationship of a point’s coordinates. Proofs have enabled us to use Calculus A topics such as the power rule, the quotient rule, and so forth. Rolle’s and Mean’s theorem are also presented as proofs, enriching our discipline. Despite his contribution, however, Pythagoras merely cleared away the intruding surrounding area, allowing space for Calculus. It was not until Archimedes that very real, direct, and substantial derivative and integra were born.
200 years later, a greek Mathematician, Archimedes, discovered the geometric series while seeking a limit and worked towards finding the area under a curve, calculating pi. In trying to calculate the relationship between a parabola and its inscribed triangle, Archimedes unknowingly integrated through the use of an infinite geometric series to find that the area enclosed by a parabola and a straight line is four-thirds that of a corresponding inscribed triangle. Following this, Archimedes took this relationship and tried to find the area under a curve using infinite rectangles. Inadvertently, he came up with a numerical relationship very similar to our number of pi today. Although it was through an accident - a mistake of two crossed out numbers - that led him to calculate pi accurately, Archimedes nonetheless was able to establish at least integration, and if not objected to, also the value of pi. The area under a curve, the antiderivative, the relationship between derivatives of higher order was fundamentally discovered by Archimedes in his mathematical pursuits. Formulas used today so often, such as the circumference and area of a circle use both the pi that Archimedes calculated and the integrative relationship Archimedes discovered through his work on curves. The circumference of a circle, 2pir, is merely a derivative of the area of a circle, pir^2. In noticing this relationship, we realize just how fundamental to calculus Archimede’s discoveries really are. Taking in Pythagoras and Archimede’s contributions, Newton leads the Scientific Revolution with his elaborate and descriptive methods in learning and applying Calculus.
Although the shorter explanation of Newton’s contributions would be to talk about what he has not contributed to Calculus rather than what he has, I will nonetheless attempt to summarize Newton’s contributions in his key role in developing Calculus; that is, he (and Leibniz concurrently) discovered the connection between integration and differentiation, this known as the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus. The Fundamental consists of two parts; one outlines that a relationship can be derived forward and the second, that it can be derived in reverse, that is, integrated. This quality of derivatives is so fundamental to Calculus because of what it allows functions to do. There are states of order, the simplest being position, velocity, an acceleration. A function or relationship can be switched back and forth from each one of these orders definitely or indefinitely through differentiation and integration. It was this connection between these two Calculus topics - both somewhat established already by Archimedes - that is the foundation of all that Newton has contributed to Calculus. The history of calculus can be found embedded within Newton’s own contributions, testifying to the continuum that is the history of Calculus.
Pythagoras, Archimedes, and Newton all contributed to Calculus in both fundamental and elaborative ways. In their contributions lie the influence of the mathematicians before; thinkers such as Kepler, Descartes, Torricelli, Leibniz, Rolle, Euler and Lagrange are among the many founders of Calculus, all contributing key ideas, all learning from the ones before (although Leibniz and Newton are notable for founding Calculus independent of one another). As Newton had said in reference to his accreditation as the founder of Calculus, “If I have seen further it is only by standing on the shoulders of giants.”  The “giants” before him paved the way and laid the foundation, and Newton climbed this foundation, building upward, toward the sky.