---
layout: post
title: "The Soviet Bloc from 1945 to 1970"
date: 2011-08-31 20:18:24 +0000
categories: ['European History']
---

**The Soviet Bloc from 1945 to 1970**
The Soviet Bloc from 1945 to 1970 consisted of the countries that owed allegiance to the Soviet Union during the cold war. The Societ Bloc chiefly followed the same ideologies and political culture as the Soviets. Most often, the countries provided the Soviet Union their soil, acting as client states, for its military and miscellaneous operations. The countries were Poland, Czechoslovakia, Romania, Hungary, Bulgaria, and East Germany.

The Eastern Bloc rose and fell with its client states. In response to the NATO establishment, the Soviet Union brought forth the Warsaw Pact, to which all of the Soviet Bloc countries signed. This pact was one dictating the terms of alliance between these eastern nations, most notably giving the Soviet Union a sphere of influence and vast buffer ground from its enemies. Throughout its history, the most recognized events consist of the Hungary in 1956, Czechoslovakia in 1968, the 1989 Poland movement and the Collapse of the Berlin Wall in 1990. In Hungary, the Soviet Union extended its sphere of influence through military intervention after the anti-Soviet coup. Twelve years later, Prague Spring, a liberal, led the establishment of the Brezhnev Doctrine, to which the President of the Soviet Union, Mikhail Gorbachev nullified. By doing so, the Soviet Union ensured that the changes throughout the Eastern Block would be applied to, without resistance, the Soviet Union. The end of the Eastern Bloc came when a Solidarity movement in Poland took place, and elections were held, weakening communist influence. Finally, the Berlin Wall that had been put up to separate Germany by the Eastern Bloc collapsed in 1990, ending the dominant influence of the Soviet Union and its ideologies.
The Eastern Bloc, in addition, rose and fell as a result of its western counterparts. With respect to the West, the Warsaw Pact in itself was a pact in response to the NATO of the west. The Polish Solidarity movement, too, enraged the members of the Eastern Bloc for its “western influence,” that is, its emerging democracy. Finally, the Berlin Wall was built also to separate democratic Germany from that ruled by communists and fascists. Its collapse, then, signalled the collapse of the Eastern Bloc.
The Eastern Bloc was an alliance of states that shared a common ideology of communism, socialism, and the like. Its rise and fall aligned with the rise and fall of its client states and the influence from the West. In a sense, the Eastern Bloc was more of a defensive strategy by the Soviet Union, hoping to create these satellite states that would defend it and buffer it from western attacks. Thus the fall of the Berlin Wall marked the fall of all of these satellite states, and ultimately the Soviet Union’s sure defense.