---
layout: post
title: "Laissez-faire and the Great Depression"
date: 2011-05-09 17:07:39 +0000
categories: ['U.S. History']
---

**Laissez-faire and the Great Depression**
The period known as the Roaring Twenties was followed by a stock market crash that launched the nation into an economic depression lasting more than a decade until the war-time economic boom of World War II.  Stock market speculation, uneven distribution of income, excessive use of credit, and overproduction of consumer goods were all factors that led to the crash and panic of 1929.  President Herbert Hoover responded to this crash with— nothing.  He believed government intervention would strip Americans of their “rugged individualism.”  It was not until the inauguration of Franklin Delano Roosevelt that Americans were given any working kind of relief and reform.

Maybe most important in contributing to the crash was the government policy—or lack thereof—of the time.  The prevailing concept of laissez-faire pushed aside government regulation and left the nation on its own to enjoy the superficial “prosperity” of the Roaring Twenties.  This was a time of excessive use of credit, or spending money that was not yet attained.   Hoover, not wanting to intervene and a strong supporter of laissez-faire, left the excessive use of credit unchecked.  Worse, when the crash did indeed come, Hoover persisted in his policy of laissez-faire and did nothing until it was essentially too late.  The acts that Hoover did pass, the Smoot-Hawley Tariff, actually made the depression worse by increasing the tariff to exorbitant rates and essentially discouraging international trade.  Although Hoover eventually passed acts that lent federal loans to farmers and created works for the unemployed, he was too late and his earlier tariff and response to the bonus army convinced the people they were ready to elect a more active and caring president that would lead them out of this depression.  Franklin Delano Roosevelt and his pledge to a “New Deal” gave the people all they needed to vote Democrat.
 Once inaugurated, Roosevelt set out to inform the people that all “we have to fear, is fear itself.”  He began his administration by calling congress to a hundred day session.  During this hundred day session, Roosevelt closed all banks for four days before reopening the solvent ones and encouraging Americans to deposit their savings into them.  His personality and optimistic fireside chats helped him gain the trust of the American people.  To keep to the pledge he made when nominated, FDR repealed the prohibition act and initiated his new deal.  His new deal set out an agenda based on three R’s: Relief, Recovery, and Reform. He passed his most significant relief acts during the first new deal: civilian conservation corps and the works progress administration.  These set out to better society while at the same time, creating jobs for the unemployed. His recovery acts included the Emergency Banking Act, also known as his Bank Holiday and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, which guaranteed bank deposits up to five thousand dollars.  In addition, the Agricultural Adjustment Act, although later ruled unconstitutional, enabled the government to pay farmers to keep their crops off the market or plant less to stabilize crop prices.  This provided both relief and recovery to those farmers who were suffering from the Great Depression and never had shared in the prosperity of the Roaring Twenties.  Roosevelt’s unprecedented and innovative policies, along with his fireside chats, decreased the unemployment rate by eight percent and gave the suffering Americans hope.  Not surprisingly, Roosevelt won reelection by a landslide.  He then initiated his Second New Deal.  Although not as numerous as his first new deal, there were two acts that were of great significance.  The Wagner Act established the right for unions to bargain collectively, extending the rights of laborers, and the Social Security Act gave monthly payments to those over 65 and established unemployment compensation.  Roosevelt’s policies were truly innovative and effective, and this can be seen by the existence of many of these policies in our world today.
The Great Depression was caused by a multitude of factors, but perhaps most important would be the excessive use of credit and overspeculation, neither of which were overseen nor regulated by the government.  Furthermore the president of the time, Herbert Hoover, believed strongly in keeping the “rugged individualism” o the Americans, and the American economy free from government controls.  At the same time, he believed in protecting big businesses so that their wealth would “trickle down” to the masses.  The summation of all these factors intensified the Great Depression and left FDR and his New deal to pull the country out of this economic disaster.  FDR’s new deals were successful in employing many and heightening American morale.  Although there would not be an economic boom until the outbreak of World War II, FDR’s new deal were innovative and effective enough lower the unemployment rate and maintain it until the war.   In a time stress and need, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt gathered the nation’s energy and resources to pull its citizens back on their feet.