---
layout: post
title: "Populist movement of the 1880s and 1890s"
date: 2011-05-09 17:02:03 +0000
categories: ['U.S. History']
---

**Populist movement of the 1880s and 1890s: Election of 1896, Watershed in American Politics**
As the frontier disappeared, American politics took a turn for the worse.  This turn, named the Gilded Age by Mark Twain was rife with corruption and graft.  In response to the corruption and the constant favor of the northern big businesses, farmers formed the Populist party.  The party drafted up a new completely unique platform in Omaha, Nebraska.  The Platform called for radical, but reasonable reformations that would give farmers more equality with the big businesses of the north.  It was chiefly because of the Populist party that the election of 1896 was the watershed election it was.  In effect, the Populist party ended the stagnation of Gilded Age politics with the election of 1896.

The formation of the Populist party was initiated through the discontent of farmers over the corruption and pro-business politics of the Gilded Age and more specifically, Harrison’s Billion Dollar Congress.  Corruption during the Gilded Age was rife.  Inflation was rampant and the value of farmers’ debts were increasing because of it. Farmers wanted more money to pay off their debts.  The only resolution, as the farmers saw it, was a money standard based on silver—inflationary.  This led to the development of the Greenback party.  However, the passing of Harrison’s billion-dollar budget prompted for a new, and broader party.  In response to high tariffs, corrupt and pro-business laws, many farmers and discontented industrial workers then made up the Populist party.  The Populist party’s most important contribution was their Omaha platform.
In Omaha, Nebraska, delegates from different states with Populist ideology drafted the Omaha Platform.  This platform called for the unlimited coinage of silver, a graduated income tax, nationalized railroad, telephone and telegraph systems, loans and warehouses for farmers to stabilize prices, and an eight-hour work day for industrial workers.  The Omaha platform under James Weaver indeed lost the election of 1892, but more significantly, it initiated the rise of the Populist Party in American politics.  Because of the Populist Party, certain issues that had been hidden from the forefront of American politics, such as lower tariffs, coinage of silver and fair work-hours were brought to light.  Most significantly, a major consequence of the Populist party was their role in the watershed election of 1896.
The election of 1896 is considered a watershed election because it not only broke the stagnation of Gilded Age politics, but began a new movement towards fair labors and equality of law between big businesses and the agricultural industry.  During the Gilded Age, two conceptual beliefs were present.  These were the concept of laissez-faire and the belief of Social Darwinism.  Because of these beliefs, presidents of the era were non-interventionists and weak.  The formation of the Populist Party and their opposition to Harrison’s Billion Dollar congress led to the active and divisive election.  In the election, William Jennings Bryan of the Populist-Democratic party faced William McKinley of the Republican party.  Bryan saw his defeat, as well as the Populist’s defeat in this election.  However, McKinley’s presidential victory ushered in the dominance of pro-business policies and the beginning of modern politics.  The election of 1896 truly marked the end of hope for rural American and the triumph of industrial, urban America.  In addition, the tactics used by Mark Hanna introduced a new way of campaigning; he was the first to campaign off of a budget by hiring orators and promoters and in effect, publicizing McKinley.  His pioneering tactics has led to the modern politics we know today.
The rise and demise of the Populists party paralleled the rise and demise of rural America.  Corruption and unequal practices that essentially bolstered big businesses at the expense of farmers ushered in the Populist party.  One could argue that almost those same forces of corruption and unequal practices led to the demise of the Populist party.  Indeed corruption of the Gilded Age led to the formation of the Populist party; Indeed, McKinley won the election of 1896 chiefly by the support gathered and harnessed by Mark Hanna’s shrewd campaigning.  In essence, however, the populist party was not completely demolished, as most of its policies were later adopted by future Democratic and Republican platforms.