---
layout: post
title: "Reconciliation – Walt Whitman, Explication"
date: 2011-08-09 21:15:40 +0000
categories: ['English Literature']
---

**Reconciliation – Walt Whitman, Explication**
It is easy to hate death. It is easy to curse our enemies. Walt Whitman, however, challenges these lower, more accessible routes of perspective. In his poem, Reconciliation, he calls us to take the high road and experience for ourselves the bliss and peace of accepting human death and reconciling with our enemies. Through the elements of allusion, symbolism, imagery and figures, Reconciliation allows us a glimpse of the cleansing and peaceful effects that come with understanding the nature of death and the divinity of human beings.

The first four lines of the poem’s six lines express the sentiment that death is natural and is beautiful as God made it. The first line begins with an allusion to God, as the “Word,” a form of symbolism. Our speaker praises God by comparing him to the beauty of the sky. Using the same comparison, the speaker then describes war and its sacrifices, calling it also beautiful. Then, using figurative language, our speaker compares death to sleep, calling “Death and Night” “sisters.” He then ends his argument that death is natural with a claim that “wash again, and ever again, this soil’d world,” asserting that death, a natural cycle, cleanses and purifies the earth. Through allusion, symbolism, and figurative language, Reconciliation has so far demonstrated its notion of the natural and healthy human death.
The last three lines of the poem’s six shifts from the last assertion of human death to a related assertion of human divinity, arguing it through imagery and symbolism. The first of the last three lines begins by proclaiming the death of of this man, and following, the death of the enemy that is as divine as our speaker. Our speaker then looks to where he lies and describes him as “white-faced and still.” The imagery of a still, white face is symbolic of innocence and divinity. At the same time, real death also causes all humans to be white and still, reinforcing the speaker’s claim that all humans are equally divine, friend or foe. The poem then finishes with the symbolic gesture of a kiss, “[touching] lightly with [his] lips the white face in the coffin.” This kiss is symbolic of the man’s reconciliation to the “enemy” that he presumably killed. The imagery of him bending down, too, demonstrates his reconcilement. He had argued that all humans are divine. He now follows his own word and asks for forgiveness for having killed the man.
Through allusion, symbolism, imagery and figures, Walt Whitman presented his belief that death is natural and that all human are divine. In Reconciliation, a man who presumably killed his enemy in war proclaims this belief and then acts accordingly by asking for forgiveness. He does not regret his action, however, because of his belief that death is natural and inevitable in times of war. Whitman creates a character in Reconciliation that both proclaims his notions and acts upon them: that God has made death and humans, and so both are natural and divine.