---
layout: post
title: "The Soviet Union Between Wars"
date: 2011-08-31 20:08:52 +0000
categories: ['European History']
---

**The Soviet Union Between Wars**
The Soviet Union was throughout its history during and in between world wars chiefly communistic, totalitarian, and dictatorial. Particularly, the Soviet Union found itself comfortably nestled in this state during the Inter-war period, when Stalin became general secretary of the Communist part and subsequently proceeded to claim leadership after Lenin. Stalin advocated socialism and the consolidation of the communist regime in the Soviet Union, making it a very concentrated and powerful state. It is this state that was formed by Stalin during the interwar period that led to its success in Germany’s attempted invasion of Russia at the dawn of World War II.

During the Interwar Period, Russia experienced a divisive civil war. At this time, Lenin had already began consolidating his own power, eliminating democratic opposition. He went on to form the Politburo, or political bureau and strengthen the Bolsheviks. With this consolidation of power, he and his Bolshevik government was able to run the Red Terror, a campaign of mass arrests and executions to root out threats against their regime.  Lenin’s reign was not for long, however, as Stalin rose to power and ultimately beat out Trotsky as next to lead.
While Trotsky had far-reaching and broad ambitions to instigate revolutions all over the globe, Stalin focused more on his own empire, advocating a consolidated, socialist regime. Winning leadership position through his political influence and tactics, Stalin set out to concentrate the powers within the Soviet Union. He began by abandoning Lenin’s economic policiy and instead funded domestic developments and improvements such as the installation of a system of central planning. This system dictated everything from the building of factories to the planting of crops by farmers. Natural resources were used to invest for heavy industrial development, which would aid in what Stalin believed to be the most profitable for his state, industrial development. In addition, many, almost all farms came under the government’s supervision and even property. Despite all of these intentions to strengthen and make his nation stronger, Stalin can not be considered a good leader for he accepted no resistance. Lenin may have ran the Red Terror, but Stalin conducted the Reign of Terror where as many as three million were killed.
Because of his consolidation of power, strengthening of the Soviet Union’s economy, and brutal killing of any resisting, Stalin created a regime that was strong, resourceful, and obedient to his commands. This qualities gave the Soviet Union what it needed to overcome the Germany’s invasion of USSR in 1941. Hitler began by taking Riga, Dvinsk, Minsk, and Lvov under his control. Stalin responds by scorching the earth. Hitler than changes plans and attacks Russia from the south and sieging Leningrad. Thousands of Russians respond by digging trenches around Moscow. German advance is halted and shifts from offensive to defensive tactics.  USSR then launches two offensives against the Germans, resulting in their surrender in 1943. Because of Joseph Stalin, the Soviet Premier, Russia fought cunningly and in mass numbers, obtaining victory over the Germans.