---
layout: post
title: "Military Aggression Leading to WWII"
date: 2011-08-26 20:54:20 +0000
categories: ['European History']
---

**Military Aggression by Italy and Germany during 1930's and Responses by European Democracies**
With every peaceful response by the Allies, a step toward war was taken. Known as the Prelude to the war, the 1930’s were pervaded by German and Italian military aggression. Because of the troubled economic and political states of the big three, United States, Great Britain, and France, however, no radical or war-like measures were taken against Germany or Italy until 1939, when World War II began. Announcing rearmament in 1935, Germany officially began its military aggression, and the big three with their policy of appeasement and isolation paved way for Italy’s own military aggression and finally, the start of World War II.

Proclaiming it’s mobilization, Hitler’s armies were full fledged for the invasions that were about to take place, and the negotiations, or appeasements that he would acquire. By mobilizing, Hitler repudiated the disarmament clause of the Versailles treaty. He then went on to sign a pact with Great Britain, increasing the size of his navy to be thirty-five percent that of Great Britain’s. Fully armed, he and his troops marched into and occupied Rhineland. Not interfered, Hitler set out to annex Austria to Germany and take Sudetenland from Czechoslovakia. Finally, when Hitler and his troops invade Poland in 1939, war erupts in Europe.
In response to all of Hitler’s actions excepting the last, the Allied side, particularly with the influence of Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain, practiced a policy of appeasement, allowing Germany all that it asked for in hopes for peace. In response to Hitler’s announcement of rearmament, France, Great Britain, and even Italy condemned Germany and warned against future aggressive steps. They however took no concrete action. Following, Great Britain conspicuously demonstrates its policy of appeasement when it signs a pact with Germany, the Anglo-German Naval Pact, allowing its navy and submarine to mobilize to the aforementioned size. Part of it was to maintain peace, the other part was due to Britain’s belief that Germany would make a great bulwark against Soviet Communism. Then when Germany occupied Rhineland, France was prompted to respond; yet, England would not for it believed that Rhineland was originally Germany’s, and so allowing it its own state would maintain peace. Without England’s support, France would not act. This inaction paved way for Hitler’s annexation of Austria to which Chamberlain merely responded that he would not oppose Germany’s peaceful changes in central Europe. Hitler’s taking of Sudetenland alarmed France, but who was in a political crisis and so could not respond. Finally, Hitler’s invasion of Poland was an act that called for war, which Britain and France fiercely declared.
Less aggressive Italy’s own military action nonetheless prompted response from the United States, inciting World War II. In 1936, Italy sent troops to Libya, attempting to take the area from Ethiopia. Not capable of acquiring the area alone, Mussolini calls in Hitler and the Germans for help. They arrive with the Afrika Korps, an elite unit of Germany to fight off the British presence in Egypt. Because the combined force of Italy and Germany out-forced the British, the U.S. responded by implementing a Lend-Lease policy to which it was allowed to lease arms and artillery for other nations while still keeping its isolationist status. Nonetheless, it was clear that the European war had erupted into World War II.
Through examination of Germany’s tactics and subsequently the responses by the big three, we realize the policy of appeasement brought on the war more than it did peace. In the midst of this, Italy begins its own military aggression and pulls its own battles in Africa into the war, prompting the Lend-Lease policy and future involvement policies by the United States, transforming what was a European war into a world war. The combined aggression of Germany, Italy, and later Japan delivered the blatantly escalating measures that incited the big three, and soon many other countries to World War II.