---
layout: post
title: "Industrial Revolution: Rise of Unions"
date: 2011-08-26 20:47:54 +0000
categories: ['European History']
---

**Early Industrial Revolution: Rise of Working Class – Successes and Failures**
Today the United Kingdom implements minimum wage and eight hour work days, five days a week, and its workers are represented in politics. In the 1800’s however, such regulations and rights were nonexistent. To top it off, the competitive environment of the emerging Industrial Revolution pitted worker against worker, leaving disorder in its path. Seeking to ameliorate such situations, workers of shared intent formed associations and conducted movements to establish order and cooperation in their chaotic and corrupting society. By establishing these associations workers were able to fight for decent wages, viable work hours, and political democracy.
Small trade associations were the first to make visible appearances in their effort for higher wages to improve the working conditions of the early Industrial Revolution. In England, a small group of hand-loom weavers coordinated a strike in Glasgow 1813, desperate for higher wages. Similarly, in Manchester five years later, cotton spinners organized a strike also calling for higher wages. The cotton spinners were able to survive from the financial assistance of sympathizers and supporters. Both the strikes by the hand-loom weavers and the cotton spinners, although mostly unsuccessful, brought attention to their working conditions and are considered a demonstration of the workers’ efforts to improve their living conditions. With the same intentions, the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union in 1834 took action.
An amalgamation of smaller trade associations, the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union garnered support and coordinated a general strike with the intent of implementing an eight hour work day. Most workers of its time worked twelve to sixteen hours per day, six days a week with little wage to support their families or even themselves. Such working conditions led to violence, neglected children, and starving, deteriorating families. To mitigate such conditions, the Grand National Consolidated Trade Union coordinated a strike for a eight hour work day, allowing workers time to return to their families, to sleep, or to buy or produce food. However unsuccessful, the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union nonetheless brought light to the issue of political policy for working conditions, a focus that Chartism would advocate four years later.
Chartism was a political movement organized in the 19th century with the intention of drawing up a “people’s charter,” demanding, most notably, universal male suffrage. Because of the constant failure of societal tactics such as the aforementioned strikes and unions, a group of workingmen organized this political movement toward universal male suffrage so that Industrial wage workers would be represented and hold influence in their country’s politics, particularly in the sphere of Industrial relations. Their efforts are most apparent in their acquisition of two national petitions, each of millions of signatures calling for universal male suffrage and other related points. Chartism may have been unsuccessful in its time, but a movement led by Lord John Russell, Thomas Attwood, David Lloyd George and various others, resulting in Reform Bills and ultimately the Equal Franchise Act of 1928, would achieve the mission Chartism had pursued and brought awareness to.
Through associations, unions, and political movements, workers demonstrated their efforts to improve the increasingly harsh conditions of the workplace.  The Industrial Revolution may have set society in motion toward technological success, but it also corrupted the hands of those controlling its wheel.  All of the mentioned efforts, the strikes, the national union, and the political movement may have failed in its efforts toward an immediate employment reform, but that is not to say their efforts were in vain for they brought an awareness to England the corrupting effects of the Industrial Revolution. The later United Kingdom Labour Laws in 1909 and the numerous reform bills from 1832 to 1928 would achieve what these workers had called attention to in the early nineteenth century.