---
layout: post
title: "U.S. Expansionism: Roosevelt and Wilson"
date: 2011-05-09 17:03:43 +0000
categories: ['U.S. History']
---

**U.S. Expansionism:**
**The Roosevelt Corollary And Its Applications by Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson**

Americans realized the potential of overseas markets and so revitalized the concept of expansionism to gain strong influence abroad.  Under Theodore Roosevelt, expansionism was at high tide and with the proclamation of his corollary, Roosevelt established a policy that would be often frequented by future presidents.  Under his own administration, Roosevelt applied his corollary to instigate a Panama Rebellion and to interject Britain’s financial dealings with Venezuela.  A following progressive president, Woodrow Wilson who was elected three years after Roosevelt, applied the corollary numerous times.  In Mexico, he interjected its revolution; in Haiti he sent troops to restore political and economic order;  and in the Dominican Republic he intervened by mandating the nation democratically elect a leader.

During the period of U.S. expansionism, interests of oversea markets reached peak.  Especially of interest was the thin strip of land between the Pacific Ocean and the Atlantic Ocean.  Investors and even Roosevelt himself believed building a canal here would greatly benefit U.S. economy.  At the time, however, Colombia controlled this strip of land—Panama, and set the price too high for the U.S.   Using his own corollary, the president rationalized his aid in a rebellion in Panama in turn for a lower cost of building a canal there.  Roosevelt references his corollary once more when he found the British sending warships to Venezuela to collect debt.  Roosevelt found it unhealthy that these countries were defaulting their debts to foreign nations and that these nations were bringing warships to collect these debts.  He called to come between foreign nations and Latin America when it came to debts.  Essentially, he proclaimed Americans would be the ones to pick up the debts to deliver to European nations.  This gave Americans yet another reason to be of presence in Latin America.  Roosevelt’s corollary was powerful in its encouragement of expansionism, so during Wilson’s progressive and expansionist administration, it came to be referenced numberously.
In 1914, Mexico was in the middle of a revolution that had started in 1910.  Several marines were accidentally arrested in Tampico, Tamaulipas, but Wilson used this as a reason to invade Mexico at Vercruz.  Here, Wilson uses the policing policy clause of the Roosevelt Corollary to justify sending troops into Mexican territory.  It was not until November of the same year that U.S. occupation ended with the mediation with Mexico set up by Argentina, Brazil and Chile.  The following year, Wilson sent marines to Haiti after the assassination of the President of Haiti.  Again the Roosevelt Corollary was used to justify the invasion, as the justification cites, “to restore and maintain political and economic stability in the Caribbean”.   For the third time on the third year, Wilson refers to the Roosevelt Corollary to declare his ultimatum for Dominicans to democratically elect a leader, or else the United States would appoint one.  This however, concluded any further, major intervention by America in Latin American affairs.
The progressive shift of the time prompted presidents to improve their domestic economy through international expansion.  Finding overseas markets were key to the nation’s economy and thus the Roosevelt Corollary was proclaimed.  It was effective in justifying foreign policy; however, it greatly diminished American-Latin American relations.  It isn’t until presidency reached Franklin Delano Roosevelt that American foreign policy was reversed and Americans expressed a “Good Neighbor Policy” towards Latin America, marking the end of economic expansionism and the beginning of international cooperation.