---
layout: post
title: "Summary of The Inquisition"
date: 2011-07-19 21:01:25 +0000
categories: ['European History']
---

**Summary of The Inquisition**
Crying of witchcraft resonated throughout the history of Europe and the New World. Many spheres of thought or institutions have been attributed to the belief, usually hysteria, of witchcraft. Among these are phenomena such as demonology, Catharism, Inquisition, and Antinomianism. The originating force, however, of witchcraft was not by one, but by various contributions from all forms of these theories and institutions. A controversial alleged source of the rise of the witchcraft hysteria so particularly prevalent in the sixteenth to seventeenth centuries is the Inquisition, a system intended to fight heresy in the Roman Catholic Church. Its establishment, system, and influence in regards to witchcraft are detailed below.

The Inquisition is an age-old institution that has lasted through centuries, despite beliefs claiming that it was a mere, short-lived corruption in the Church. Established by Pope Innocent III during his reign from 1198 to 1216. This establishment was furthered by Pope Gregory IX in his combat with the heresy of the Abilgenses. Peaking in the fifteenth and sixteenth century, the Inquisition found itself established all throughout central and western Europe, and although never present in England or Scandinavia, the system pervaded strongly throughout Protestant, Catholic, and Dominican sects.All over Europe, individuals faced the harsh punishment and arbitration of the Inquisition.
The system of the Inquisition implemented harsh punishments delivered by the mere judgement of a Clergymen, and the conviction without many rights afforded to the accused. The system consisted of an open trial where an Edict of Grace would be published, allowing those accused to confess; after the period of grace was over, officers were allowed to fully accuse heretics and those accused would then be sentenced at an “Act of Faith,” where proceedings of a trial would occur under a Clergymen. It was up solely to the clergymen to deliver a punishment that generally involved confinement to dungeons, physical abuse, and torture. Those who confessed were strangulated and burned; those who did not were not strangulated and burned. During the height of the Inquisition attendance at the Act of Faith reached as high as that of contemporary bullfights. Witchcraft, considered heresy, can be found in the history of the Inquisition, especially during its time of peak from the 16th to 17th centuries.
Although the Inquisition accused and punished heretics just as the hysteria of witchcraft involved accusing and punishing witches and both peaking around the same time period, the Inquisition actually had less influence over the rise of witchcraft than generally believed. A main separation of influence would be that while the Inquisition was a Roman Catholic tradition, witchcraft involved more of mob-rule and political authority. An apparent example of this disparity is the summit of witchcraft mania existing in England, where the Inquisition, aforementioned, was not even established at all. In addition, it was the authorities in Geneva, Switzerland that burned 500 accused witches at the stake in 1515, while its Lutherans were hardly persecuted. This topic, however, is controversial in part that it can be argued that one sphere of thought influenced the other – such as authorities taking note of the Inquisition and justifying their own disobedient or threatening citizens and neighbors as heretics. Also, the Inquisition could have possibly effected the culture of hysteria in Europe, allowing it to react the way it did to the rise of witchcraft.
The Inquisition was established and spread through western and central Europe, pervading European culture with a system of confession and harsh punishment. And although its influence over witchcraft is vague, one thing can still be said about the Inquisition: that it did heighten the culture of hysteria in Europe. Evidence of whether it was this culture of hysteria that laid the foundation of witchcraft is vague, just as the evidence against those accused of witchcraft were. It is in our best interest, then, to not make any assumptions and be content with the information we do have regarding the Inquisition.
Works Cited
18, the second half of the. "The Inquisition." Jewish Virtual Library - Homepage. N.p., n.d. Web. 19 July 2011. .
"The Malleus Maleficarum." The Malleus Maleficarum. N.p., n.d. Web. 19 July 2011. .
"Witchcraft, demonology & inquisition." Library, The University of Sydney. N.p., n.d. Web. 19 July 2011. .