---
layout: post
title: "The Disquieting Muses - Sylvia Plath"
date: 2011-08-10 20:37:11 +0000
categories: ['English Literature']
---

**Confessional Poetry: The Disquieting Muses - Sylvia Plath**
A genre of poetry that appears to have emerged and faded with their originators, confessional poetry can be described as that of raw emotion and craftsmanship written in autobiographical form dealing with highly personal or severe experiences. The two most notable authors of such a genre are Sylvia Plath and Anne Sexton. This essay will examine Sylvia Plath and in particular her ekphrastic work, The Disquieting Muses. The work, a musing of a child, is an example of confessional poetry. The Disquieting Muses is written in personal, autobiographical form, describes a surreal depression within a young child, and involves a high level of craftsmanship.

The speaker of The Disquieting Muses addresses himself directly from his perspective to his mother, giving it an autobiographical form, an element of confessional poetry. Throughout the work, the baby - our speaker - refers to his thoughts, his development and actions in the form of “I.” Addressing his mother, he expresses, “I wonder / Whether you saw them, whether you said / Words... I learned, I learned, I learned elsewhere... I woke one day to see you, mother...” (Plath). Our speaker autobiographically expresses his thoughts, development and actions. This form of expression acquires the poem a tone and feel of confessional poetry. The tone of personal “I” however, is not the only one present; the demonstrated depression of this young baby, too, carries the poem the tone of confessional poetry.
Poet’s previously had not ventured into the highly personal, oppressive subjects that Plath explored, making the dark qualities of The Disquieting Muse an aspect of confessional poetry. The depressed young child depicted in this work attests to its depressive elements. Rather than join his mother in the sky, who “[l]ike a soap-bubble... [she] called: Come here!,” the baby resolutely rejects her call and instead “faced [his] traveling companions... no frown of [his] [would] betray the company [he kept]” (Plath). The coldness of this last line portrays a heartbroken child who had failed at both his subjects of piano and dancing because his mother had made him so stone. The depressed quality of the child makes The Disquieting Muse a dark an oppressive work, one that defines confessional poetry.
The Disquieting Muse has one last aspect to be examined, perhaps the most important: the craftsmanship so characteristic of confessional poetry, the careful imagery of color and allusions to mythology. In this work, the imagery of color can be seen in the various descriptions of mannequins around him. He begins by depicting the muses that surround him: “Nodding by night around my bed...” He then goes on to describe how his mother left, “[o]n a green balloon.” The speaker finally ends the poem with imagery of “[the muses’] shadows long in the setting sun” (Plath). From the colors of black to green to black and dark yellow, the imagery of color in this poem helps add to the depressive mood and craftsmanship so characteristic of confessional poetry. The technicality of the poem does not end there however. Plath’s poetic allusion to Greek-Roman mythology also lends the work an element of confessional poetry. The subjects of the poem, the three muses, are directly related to the Greco-Roman Muse: any of a group of sister goddesses, daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne. Together, the color imagery and the allusion to mythology help us interpret the work, understanding that these muses are related and that the world around them, surrounding this baby, is dark - black, green, dark yellow. The story of a young child disillusioned by his mother’s pursuit of fantasy can be realized through the technical elements of this poem. The sheer genius of craftsmanship evident in The Disquieting Muses attests to its labeling as of the confessional poetry genre.
Through examining the elements of confessional poetry - personal form, surreal and darkness, and attention to poetic devices - we come to find not only that The Disquieting Muses is indeed a work of confessional poetry, but also its hidden, obscure tale. A young depressed boy questioned his mother, asking why his fate is the way it is, but his mother is caught up in her fairy-tale, and disillusioned, the boy stays back with the muses, cold and detached, but nonetheless loyal. This ekphrastic poem, undoubtedly, is innovative in its venture to the dark, personal, and oppressive side of a world and respected for its superb craftsmanship. It is this innovative and respected quality of Plath’s poem that makes it true confessional poetry.