---
layout: post
title: "Blinded in Light, Everyday Use – Alice Walker"
date: 2011-08-03 20:43:47 +0000
categories: ['English Literature']
---

**Blinded in Light: Everyday Use – Alice Walker**
Before I knew it, I had bought the oranges that looked pretty from outside the bag, only to come home with dry-tasting oranges. The orange netting that they were carried in made them look a very strong and ripe color, but that was all it was, color. Similarly, Dee is nothing but color, light, bright, loud colors. Alice Walker highlights this through her use of imagery. Throughout the story, Walker bathes Dee in light colors but then goes to give her sunglasses in the end. In Everyday Use, Walker employs imagery to help tell the story of a girl that throws herself in light, thinking she would see, but in reality, the light pressures her to close her eyes, to put on sunglasses, blinding herself from what she sought to see. From the light and dark imagery surrounding Dee’s appearance to Dee’s sunglasses, Walker helps tell her story of a girl blinded in light.

Throughout Everyday Use, imagery of light surrounds Dee, illuminating her. In the mother’s own description of her daughter, Dee “is lighter than Maggie” (Walker, 612). Skin-tone wise, Dee is lighter than Maggie. But not only is she lighter than Dee, but she is light, in general. Testifying to this, the mother notices, “She turns, showing white heels through her sandals, and goes back to the car” (612). Here, her heels are noted as white. Finally, when Dee arrives at her house, the mother remarks, “[t]here are yellows and oranges enough to throw back the light of the sun” (Walker, 612). In addition to Dee’s light skin, her clothes are bright too. Alice Walker employs all of this light imagery to Dee to illuminate her, to emphasize in the atmosphere that she is indeed an “enlightened” girl, educated of her time. However, this is merely a set up; the story concludes with Dee putting on her sunglasses, shielding her eyes.
Just as she finishes taking pictures of the house and taking some of her mother’s belongings, Dee walks back outside, into her car, and into her sunglasses, completing Walker’s analogy of a girl surrounded by light, but in darkness. Upon reaching her car, her mother waves and watches her as she “put on some sunglasses that hid everything above the tip of her nose and chin” (Walker, 613). Just as Dee had finished yelling at her mom and Maggie for not understanding, she walks to her car and puts on sunglasses. The illumination that Walker had bathed Dee in is still there, but Dee shields herself from it. This last imagery of the darkness formed by her sunglasses is symbolic and complementing of the story in many ways. Throughout her stay at her mother’s house, Dee could see nothing but artifacts that she can hang and show to the world, “African culture.” Yet the way she treats these relics, the way she rudely behaves toward her mother and sister is everything but African. Walker’s story leads us to believe that she was educated in the oppression of slavery and the African race, and that is why she changed her name to an African name and is “treasuring” all these bits and pieces of African culture. However, the way that she changes her name to an African name, giving up the name of her African grandmother and great grandmothers, how she disrespects her own African family and ask to take away their quilts and butter churns is irony of situation in itself. The light and dark imagery complements this because it, too, is ironic. While light is usually used to depict good, it is used here only to blind a girl to reality. Dee’s enlightened mind did not so much open her eyes as close them, and we see this clearly through Walker’s alignment of light and darkness to Everyday Use.
Both the imagery of light surrounding Dee and her final shielding of that light parallels the ironic story of a girl blinded in light. While Dee feels enlightened and all-knowing, imagery of light follows her. After readers learn of her behavior and treatment of her family, however, a dark imagery is used in shrouding her, emphasizing to us readers the irony apparent in Dee’s life. Light and darkness follow Everyday Use creating, at first, a bright illuminating light that soon comes to fade as Dee’s sentiments manifest, and the light is finally muffled and shrouded by the final image of sunglasses upon Dee’s eyes. Through her imagery of light and darkness, Walker seeks to complement her story with a guideline, making her message very clear that there is a difference between the real African culture of family and tradition and pop African culture of exhibitions and exotic names.