---
layout: post
title: "Defining Corridors of Science"
date: 2012-12-06 08:00:56 +0000
categories: ['Philosphy']
---

**Defining Corridors of Science:
Arguments by Thomas Kuhn, V.S. Ramachandran, Jacob Bronowski, Michael Shermer, and Richard Bentall**
*Word Count: 1503*
In this paper, science is defined as an intellectual and practical activity, distinguished from other fields of knowledge by its basis in the scientific approach. The definition of science is reached through collective research of arguments by Thomas Kuhn, V.S. Ramachandran, Jacob Bronowski, Michael Shermer, and Richard Bentall. In defending the definition, I discuss each of its implications: science as an intellectual activity, science as a practical activity, the unique process of the scientific approach, and the sciences as distinguished from other fields of knowledge through its application of this approach. During this discussion, I also address what it means for knowledge to be scientific, the assumptions implicit in a scientific approach to a problem, and when, if possible, would a non-science field be scientific.

To begin, we focus our attention toward science defined as an intellectual activity. According to “The Route to Normal Science,” by Thomas Kuhn, a science is established based upon whether its theory is novel and fruitful. Regarding adopted theories, Kuhn writes, “Their achievement was sufficiently unprecedented to attract an enduring group of adherents away from competing modes of scientific activity. Simultaneously, it was sufficiently open-ended to leave all sorts of problems for the redefined group of practitioners to resolve” (Kuhn 111). In other words, a theory becomes science when it charms our intellectual desires for novelty and exploration. This definition of science as an intellectual pursuit is broad, however, as it easily encompasses many non-science fields (i.e. philosophy). Thus we progress onward with our definition, toward science as a practical activity.
In addition to functioning as an intellectual activity, science is also a practical activity. To align with Kuhn’s theory of the paradigm, this is the side of science that exists once a paradigm has been accepted. V.S. Ramachandran makes a head nod to this in his book, “A Brief Tour of the Human Consciou5ness.”  He refers to this form of science as no longer “driven by curiosity” and ““professionalized” into just another nine-to-five job” (Ramachandran, XIII). This is when scientists simply work within the implications of a paradigm, more or less applying them to the practical world in the form of day-to-day research, publishing papers, and manufacturing technology. But the non-science field of literature involves activities analogous to these, such as day-to-day drafting, publishing stories and providing readers with entertainment. So to distinguish science from other fields of knowledge, we affix our final, characteristic quality of science: its application of the scientific approach.
Unlike the humanities, science employs a methodology called the scientific approach. The scientific approach is the object-oriented evaluation of data and subsequent verification of those data and evaluations. This approach is the trademark of science – its application the defining criterion of whether an acquired knowledge is scientific or mere speculation. The implication of scientific knowledge is that it is scientific, having undergone each of the scientific processes, so is accurate, unbiased and verified to a reliable degree. This implication does not correspond to knowledge in the humanities, since the humanistic approach to knowledge is unlike that of science. For instance, history does not acquire its knowledge through empirical means and can not reproduce the data with which it studies. How then, do the humanities acquire their collection of knowledge? We approach this question with a comparison.
To further define the scientific approach, and distinguish science from the humanities, we directly compare the scientific approach with the humanistic approach. How each of these two fields approach their respective body of knowledge is differentiated in “The Reach of Imagination,” by Jacob Bronowski, who points out, “In science, the imaginary experiment is tested by confronting it with the physical experience... in literature, the imaginative conception is tested by confronting it with the human experience” (Bronowski 106-107). Specifically, while science deals with object-oriented evidence, the humanities deal with human-oriented experience. For example, regarding works of literature, it is not so much about the physical properties of the ink and paper as much as it is about experiencing the message that literature communicates. On the other hand, regarding chemical bonding, it is not so much about how we personally experience the phenomena, as it is comprehensively about the properties of electrons surrounding the atoms. This is of course ideal. Alas, we encounter problems in actual applications of the scientific approach. With respect to collecting data on chemical bonding, how we personally experience the phenomena does make itself scientifically relevant – since we are the ones who conduct these evaluations and, as humans, we are naturally prone to individual biases that put as at risk for jumping to erroneous conclusions. Thus we ask, what is to stop our biases from seeping into the research and experiments that we try to keep unbiased?
Although we cannot defend against all of our own biases, we have been effective in exercising fortifications against most of them. While the humanities encourage aligning with our social values, science generally seeks to exist independently of them, warranting evaluative standards against personalized biases. Michael Shermer summarizes these procedures in his paper, “When Scientist’s Sin,” “The reason that [fraud] is so rare (compared with, say, corruption in politics) is that science is designed to detect deception (of one’s self and others) through colleague collaboration, graduate student mentoring, peer review, experimental corroboration and results replications” (Shermer 98). We see here that works in science are subject to a number of standards, including group evaluations, publication of experiments and reproduction of results. These procedures help standardize and verify science, allowing for its universal understanding and application.
But let us say a social value exists so universally that it colors all of our minds. To ensure everyone interprets a scientific work similarly, would science involve itself with social values, then? We have analyzed ways with which science defends itself against individual biases, but omnipresent biases are a different matter. To be properly understood and practically maintained, science sometimes does involve and functionally needs the consideration of social values. We understand this functional need through Richard Bentall’s satire, “A proposal to classify happiness as a mental disorder,” within which he writes, “One possible objection to this proposal remains – that happiness is not negatively valued. However, this objection is dismissed as scientifically irrelevant” (Bentall 139). Through his use of satire, Bentall reasons that because happiness is not considered a mental disorder, our method of science does involve human values, and this involvement is actually scientifically relevant. Without considering the social value on happiness (positive), we would be classifying happiness as a disorder, despite that there is no need for happiness to be considered a disorder; conversely, we might not classify some negatively-affecting conditions as disorders, despite that there is a need for these conditions to be considered disorders (so that we may direct research toward their treatments options). The crossover of certain social values into science is necessary. This begs the comparison, is there likewise a crossover of the scientific approach into the humanities?
In recognizing the crossovers of social values into the sciences, we are drawn now toward exploring the analog crossovers of the scientific approach into the humanities. This exists: in fact, the branch of social sciences refers to the academic disciplines that exemplify just this. Psychology, although chiefly a study of human experience, extends itself into the scientific methods of examining the physical brain, biological nerves, and chemical imbalances in the body to better understand the human experience and solve problems pertaining to the human condition. Undergoing these clearly scientific methods discerns psychology as a scientific research – but its simultaneous purpose to examine the human condition discerns psychology as social research. Collectively the two qualities earn psychology the category of a social science. A cohort of other disciplines that would otherwise exist strictly within either side of the presumed dichotomy also straddle the line between science and the humanities:  art involving color psychology, economics involving fiscal algorithms, and more recently, the neuroscientific study by V.S. Ramachandran, linking our physical brain to the abstract ability of creativity.
As we see, science is an intellectual and practical activity that distinguishes itself through applications of the scientific approach. It is in addition discernibly different from the humanities, although both seek intellectual satisfaction and confront the practical world. While the humanities rely upon human experience to drive its pursuits and evaluate its claims, science relies more upon physical evidence to solidify its theories and verify its conclusions. Nuances do exist, however, in the line dividing science and the humanities: examples of these are the unintentional and intentional crossover of social values into the sciences, and that of the scientific approach into the humanities. Some of these crossovers are actually healthy, even required, for either disciplines of study. Thus, to discredit either fields of knowledge as a means of understanding the world is to be ignorant of their overlap. From inquiry into the various works discussed in this paper, we arrive at an inextricable convergence: both science and the humanities play key and intertwined roles within any pursuit toward a comprehensive understanding of our general existence.
*Personal Rating: 5/5*