---
layout: post
title: "Reality and the Merit of Language"
date: 2012-10-09 08:00:27 +0000
categories: ['Philosphy']
---

**Reality and the Merit of Language: Amy Tan and Alleen Nilsen**
*Word Count: 566*
In “Sexism in English,” Alleen Nilsen proposes that examining language directly corresponds to the real understanding of people and their thoughts. On the other hand, Amy Tan writes in “Mother Tongue” that seeking only language can actually limit our understanding of reality. Evaluating the two claims, I find that both may coexist and that language is like most tools, useful when sharp, but limiting and needs to be passed over by other tools when blunt.

For people who are able to express exactly what they think, Nilson shows that the language they use directly reflects the reality they live. Her article covers the change in word use that corresponds to the general rise and fall of sexism from our history to present. Take for example, the pattern Nilson primarily finds in old literature, “...heir-heiress, hero-heroine, steward-stewardess…” (Nilson 28). The main form of words here depicts males, while the afterthought-like suffix of those words depicts females. Now forward to the present, “...Chairman is giving way to chair or head, mailman to mail carrier, clergyman to clergy…” (Nilson 35). Male-centric “base” words have been adjusted to be fair to both genders. Our author evaluates this change as the reflective property of reality in language. From this, Nilson asserts, “Language is like an X-ray in providing visible evidence of invisible thoughts” (Nilson 37). In other words, there has been a change in societal perspectives, and the adjustments to our language reveal this.
Approaching from a counter angle, Amy Tan tells of a life where language is actually limiting in its use, shown to confine, and even mislead, listeners from what is present. In describing her mother’s “broken” English, Tan writes, “It has always bothered me that I can think of no way to describe [my mother’s English] other than ‘broken’… as if everything is limited” (Tan 39). So despite that Amy is in fact fluent in English, she struggles to find a precise word to portray her mother’s style of English. In attempt to communicate both the content and sentiment of her mother’s words, Amy expands to other tools of communication, “I began to write stories using all of the Englishes I grew up with...” (Tan 42). Here, “Englishes” does not refer to a new language so much as it conceives to summon in all of us the childhood, history, culture and/or experiences we have that is reminiscent of the experiences Tan portrays; thus, using words merely to inspire, rather than to actually tell, her story: “I wanted to capture what language ability tests can never reveal: [my mother’s] intent, her passion, her imagery, the rhythms of her speech and the nature of her thoughts.” (Tan, 42). And she does this, we find, by not relying on language alone, but by considering us, the readers, and our experiences, and to write in such a way that her stories are kindled by shared culture, history or background - providing us our own personal understanding.
From Alleen Nilson’s strong embrace of language as lens for reality to Amy Tan’s life dealing with the limitations of English, we find that although language can reflect reality, such correlation is restricted to situations involving those who speak and understand that same language; otherwise, language is reduced to but a fragment of a much larger picture, a picture that will need all the support of speaker, listener, and shared experiences to be wholly understood.

*Personal Rating: 4/5*