---
layout: post
title: "Plagiarism and Its Permissibility"
date: 2012-11-12 08:00:19 +0000
categories: ['Philosphy']
---

**Plagiarism and Its Permissibility: In Alignment with "The Way We Lie" by Stephanie Ericsson**
*Word Count: 1375*
The distinction between borrowing ideas and plagiarism – plagiarism here defined as the unauthorized use of the work of others – lies in whether the work cites the original authors for their contributions.  While plagiarism is usually wrong, there are instances of which plagiarism is considered fair.  When writers avoid the facade that the ideas they borrowed are theirs in the first place, then their work, although plagiaristic, is customarily considered appropriate. In this paper, we evaluate three cases that each involve plagiarism but differ in their level of appropriateness.

We begin by defining facade, the attribute that divides inappropriate from appropriate plagiarism.  In “The Ways We Lie” by Stephanie Ericsson, Ericsson defines facade as a destructive lie that seduces others into an illusion (Ericsson 45).  That is to say, texts that implicitly, explicitly, or both-wise express that the ideas the writer borrowed are the writer’s own ideas is a form of lie.  This form of lie is what we distinguish as that constituting inappropriate plagiarism.
A case of inappropriate plagiarism is that of scientist Marc Hauser, who copied another scientist’s ideas to form the central theme of his book, “Moral Minds.”  Although this is plagiarism, it was Hauser’s pretension that the ideas were his own that made his work unacceptable to the public.  Charles Gross in “Disgrace: On Marc Hauser,” lists several instances of Hauser’s plagiarism but makes it a point at the end of his listing to emphasize, “[Hauser] does not say that this is Mikhail’s (2000) account…developed further in Mikhail (2002a)” (Gross 94). Through this statement, Gross draws our attention toward the dishonesty that warrants criticism into this account of plagiarism. Hauser used John Mikhail’s ideas for the central theme of his book as well as included various examples that Mikhail had used. He proceeded to publish “Moral Minds” under his own name, not discernibly attributing Mikhail as the source of the ideas he took. Hauser indiscriminately combined Mikhail's work with his own and, by not citing, made the public think that all of the ideas not specifically cited in the book were his own.  This is deceptive plagiarism that is not only inappropriate, misleading us to believe Hauser as the author of these ideas, but also unfair, discrediting Mikhail from these ideas.
On the other hand, plagiarism that is acknowledged as plagiarism is conventionally accepted – and even celebrated when the ideas are used to create something new and insightful.  In “The Plagiarist’s Tale,” Lizzie Widdiecomb quotes literary theorist Avital Ronell, “We live in an age of sampling, from ‘Pride and Prejudice and Zombies’ to Skrillex remixes. ‘We love remakes. We love makeovers.’” (Widdiecomb 77).  Here Ronell references a popular case of acknowledged plagiarism in our society: the so-called mash-ups and remakes. Examples of these include Jonathan Lethem’s “The Ecstasy of Influence: A Plagiarism,” which uses unoriginal texts to make a profound point, sampling musician Girl Talk, and postmodern writer Kathy Acker who uses plagiarism to highlight the apparent unoriginality of some novels within close-knit genres (Widdicomb 77). All of these are literary mash-ups or satires that involve plagiarism, but are acceptable and celebrated for their honesty in presenting and working with the writings of others.
We have examined cases of plagiarism by Marc Hauser and various contemporary artists, juxtaposing inappropriate and appropriate plagiarism. However, because whether or not honesty is the variable that determines the appropriateness within these two cases is not clear, we may wonder whether other variables are responsible. To clear this ambiguity, we will close in on two sides of just one case and consider expert interpretations on the role of honesty. A case widely discussed is that of Quentin Rowan, a notorious, wide-reaching plagiarist. Rowan is the author of “Assassin’s Secret,” a novel that consists of a multitude of quotations from novels of predecessors without citations. This is plagiarism. Quentin Rowan released this book wanting people believe that he had written the entirety of the novel (Widdicombe 77). Did the general public consider this inappropriate? Although a few individuals praised “Assassin’s Secret” for its perceived satirical quality, the general public did not view the author in such a positive light. On the aftermath of Rowan’s exposé, Widdicomb describes, “Little, Brown asked that [Rowan] pay back his advance – fifteen thousand dollars, for two books – and reimburse the company for the book’s production costs. [Rowan] was no longer welcome at the bookstore. He’d been about to move in with his girlfriend, a lawyer, but she broke up with him...” (Widdicombe 69). Left and right, Rowan suffered the consequences that his book incurred him. Were these consequences because he plagiarized, or because he intended to deceive? Widdicombe makes the distinction clear: “The peculiar thing about Rowan’s case is that he could have obtained a degree of social permission simply by being honest about borrowing from other writers – by doing what Jonathan Lethem did, or by claiming that he was producing a ‘meta’ work” (Widdicomb 77). It wasn’t because he plagiarized, but that he had tried to pass off the work of others as his own that his reputation spiraled downhill. Had he not hid behind this facade, his story would have received greater positive attention and his work considered appropriate plagiarism. The case of “Assassin’s Secrets” clearly distinguishes honesty as the variable that determines acceptable plagiarism.
Not only have we discerned inappropriate from appropriate plagiarism, but we have also clarified the role of honesty in the two cases. The final concern of this paper would be whether our discussion takes into account the opposing argument: since regardless of honesty, theft of property is always unacceptable, and ideas are like property, then regardless of facade, plagiarism is also always unacceptable. Backing this view, the editorial board of Nature Photonics in “Combating Plagiarism,” writes, “Published ideas, thoughts, concepts and results are the tangible essence of a scientist, and must be defended” (Nature Photonics 101). The board says ideas are property; in which case, independent of what facade we put on while taking them – we are still stealing and our actions must be rectified. This would be true, except when we question whether ideas reasonably have a tangible essence to them. As Gladwell explains through his quoting of “Free Culture” by Lawrence Lessig, “...In practically every case except for a narrow range of exceptions – ideas released to the world are free... As Thomas Jefferson said... ‘He who receives an idea from me, receives instruction himself without lessening mine; as he who lights his taper at mine, receives light without darkening me’” (Gladwell 58). Like light, ideas are pervasive and exist in a continuum with the rest of our world. Ideas do not need to be taken from somewhere in order to be put into somewhere else. They can, without tangible cost, be reproduced and developed within our minds, unlike property. So the answer to our question is no, ideas do not reasonably have a tangible essence to them. Because ideas are not analogous to tangible property, the claim that plagiarism in of itself  is theft of property – so is always unacceptable – fails.
Through our discussion of plagiarism and when it is appropriate, we examined Ericsson’s definition of facade, Hauser’s dishonesty in “Moral Minds,” the acceptability of contemporary hit remakes, the ramifications of Rowan’s plagiarism, and the intangible essence of ideas. We drew the respective deductions that the facade is deceptive, that plagiarism with deception is unfair – while plagiarism without it is respectable, that the use of deception determines whether plagiarism is inappropriate, and that plagiarism is not analogous to stealing property. Cumulative analysis of these observations lead us to a resounding conclusion: In order for writings to be fair and acceptable, their authors must respect and acknowledge the sources that they drew their inspirations from, whether that acknowledgement be in the form of explicit citation or implicitly through tone that the idea was not theirs in the first place. Thus, a rule of thumb is to respect the work of others as we would want our own work to be respected. This understanding is crucial – for in the cases of Marc Hauser and Quentin Rowan – it alone could have precluded the downward spiral of their respective careers.
*Personal Rating: 5/5*