---
layout: post
title: "Moral Culpability of Victor McKusick and Susan Hsu"
date: 2013-02-25 11:05:49 +0000
categories: ['Philosphy']
---

**Moral Culpability of Victor McKusick and Susan Hsu**
*Word Count: 1994*
Sewing siblings together to mimic Siamese twins and dissecting live patients to study organ functions are only two of the innumerable malpractice cases conducted by Nazi Doctors during the 1940’s. Disturbed by these crimes, the United States Military Tribunal, alongside international agreement, advanced the Nuremberg Code, a set of principles that was to govern the ethics of clinical experimentation worldwide. Advocating the idea of informed consent and decreeing its importance in medical practice, the first line of the Nuremberg Code reads, “[t]he voluntary consent of the human subject is absolutely essential” (Skloot 97).  It follows that in order to ethically proceed with human experimentation, researchers must obtain the voluntary consent of every human subject involved. Researchers who do not obtain the necessary voluntary consent defy the code of ethics set forth by the Nuremberg Code. By the code, research that violates informed consent is unethical, and the researchers involved are deemed morally culpable. In consideration of Victor McKusick, who refrained from informing his subject of the nature his research, and Susan Hsu, who neglected to confirm her subjects’ understanding of her research, both cases are found to undermine essential elements of informed consent. Therefore, the actions of McKusick and Hsu are ethically illegitimate, and, in reflection of their accountability as research professionals, the two are morally culpable for their respective ethical perversions.

Defining informed consent and analyzing its foundational elements provide insight on how McKusick and Hsu both committed ethically illegitimate actions against their subjects, the Lacks family. Informed consent, as defined by medical ethicists Julia Pedroni and Kenneth Pimple, “speaks to the idea that autonomous decisions reflect what one intends to do” (51). This means that the aim of informed consent is to enable individuals to make the decisions that they intend to, rather than mislead them into agreeing with decisions that they do not actually agree with. Systematically, proper process of informed consent ensures the following four elements: information, understanding, voluntariness, and decision-making. It is appropriate to further analyze the first two elements – information and understanding – as they are necessary to the secondary elements of voluntariness and decision-making, as well as foundational to the process of informed consent as a whole.
Information entails that potential subjects “be provided with all the available information that is relevant to a decision concerning participation,” with relevance varying from standards professional, reasonable, and subjective (Pedroni and Pimple 50). Plainly, if subjects are not made aware of information that is relevant to their decision-making in the matter at hand, then any extending consent is ineffectual. This is because the extending consent would not be based on the consent of a subject who has been relevantly informed. While debate exists as to which relevance model is most appropriate, the nuance is immaterial to this paper, as the offending case of Victor McKusick violates all three.
Proceeding, the second foundational element, understanding, calls professionals to make efforts to ensure that potential subjects understand the information provided. Ensuring understanding entails both initial efforts to communicate an understandable message – which strongly urges professionals to impart information in layperson terms – and following efforts to confirm that the subject has actually understood the message (Pedroni and Pimple 51). This is crucial because if subjects do not understand the matter at hand, then they cannot reliably consent to what they may have actually wanted to consent to, had they otherwise understood their situation; as a result, informed consent would be frustrated.
Through analysis of these two elements, it is realized that without being provided the necessary relevant information or without a substantial level of understanding, the subject may express consent that is discontinuous with actual intent. Informed consent, recalling that it seeks to ensure alignment of expressed consent with actual intent, would under the circumstance be obstructed. In light of this consequence, it is seen that neglecting either the element of information or understanding obstructs the collective process of informed consent and, in the bigger picture, the Nuremberg code of ethics.
Dr. McKusick undermined both his accountability as a physician and the process of informed consent when he took Deborah’s blood without briefing her or responding to any of her questions regarding his research on her blood. His failure to uphold informed consent is ethically illegitimate; as well, neglecting his obligation as a physician evinces him morally culpable. Deborah, upon arriving at the hospital to give blood, presented well-formed questions to McKusick regarding his use of her blood. But, “McKusick did not explain why he was having someone draw blood from Deborah. Instead he told her about Henrietta’s cells being used for the polio vaccine...” (Skloot 136). Rather than answer Deborah’s questions, McKusick spoke of Henrietta’s cells, ignoring Deborah’s request for information entirely. By ignoring her questions entirely, McKusick failed to inform Deborah on any level of relevance – let it be professional, reasonable, or subjective. By his inaction, it is unequivocal that McKusick violates informed consent. Because of this violation, McKusick breaches the Nuremberg code of ethics, and as a result, his research surrenders its ethically legitimacy. In addition, as a well-versed physician of Johns Hopkins Hospital, McKusick had the capacity and obligation to inform and respond to Deborah, and in turn has no excuse for not providing Deborah the information she asked for. On that account, McKusick is fully morally culpable for violating Deborah’s medical and ethical right to information and proper informed consent. By ignoring Deborah’s appeal for information, in addition to not briefing her in the first place, McKusick blatantly defies proper process of informed consent and is through and through morally culpable for his actions.
Dr. Hsu similarly failed to uphold informed consent when she neglected to confirm understanding with members of the Lacks family before drawing their blood. Her negligence in confirming her subjects’ understanding violates informed consent and the Nuremberg code of ethics, warranting her research unethical. Furthermore, as a research professional accountable to upholding the ethics of her profession, Hsu is without justifiable defense morally responsible for her ethical violation. Embarking on her research project, Dr. Hsu phones the Lacks family, explaining what she wanted and why: “[w]e come to draw blood to get HLA antigen, we do genetic marker profile because we can deduce a lot of Henrietta Lacks genotype from the children and the husband” (Skloot 132). Hsu used words like HLA antigen, genetic marker profile, and genotype in her explanation. Not even remotely close to layperson terms, the language in information that Hsu expressed makes little sense to anyone in general outside of her field. Thus it seems Hsu did not even make the attempt to be understood. Exacerbating the situation, Day informed his family, “You got to come over to the house tomorrow, doctors from Hopkins coming to test everybody’s blood to see if you all got that cancer your mother had” (Skloot 134). Day told his family that they are giving blood so that whom he believed to be doctors can test them for cancer. Because the Lackses are a small plantation family, it is safe to assume that Day misinterpreted what Hsu had said, and soon after communicated the misinterpreted information to his family.
While Hsu may not have known that Day had misinterpreted her, it is within her line of duty as a research professional to confirm reception and understanding with each of the family members before proceeding to draw their blood. As it turned out, Hsu did not seek to confirm consent and understanding with any of the family members, drawing their blood anyway. She rationalizes her attitude of negligence by asserting that, “...you just go to draw blood. We are not doing some kind of medical research, you know, not long term. All we wanted is a few tubes of blood to do genetic marker test. It’s not involved in a human research committee or things like that” (Skloot 133). To make it seem like not a big deal, Hsu identified her research as merely a genetic test, distinguishing her research from the medical field and human research committees; in reality, her research was medical research and she was in fact a fellow under National Institutes of Health, a human research committee – particularly one that required of human research projects both the patient’s informed consent and approval from the Hopkins review board. Clearly, her research involved neither. By not confirming the family’s understanding of her research, among other violations, Hsu undermined informed consent and the medical code of ethics. Thus, she is morally culpable for violating the family’s right to informed consent, and her research forfeits its ethical legitimacy.
Although it is clear McKusick and Hsu violated due process of informed consent, there are some who view McKusick and Hsu as not morally culpable. This view, associated with the socio-legal view, insists that informed consent exists only as an institutional and legal concept. Defining informed consent as a “legally or institutionally effective (sometimes misleadingly called valid) authorization,” the socio-legal view provides grounds for informed consent existing independently of ethics, so accordingly, it may be argued that morality does not play a role in the cases of McKusick and Hsu (Pedroni and Pimple 49). This may lead to the conclusion that because informed consent is a legal concept, the violations by McKusick and Hsu are immaterial to ethical considerations; thus the two incur no moral culpability for their actions. In addition, because McKusick and Hsu were not legally charged or found guilty, basing off the socio-legal definition, the two have actually done nothing that would be called wrong or illegitimate.
The socio-legal based view may at first appear to possess merit, but after relating informed consent with the bioethical principle of autonomy, the view is exposed as superficial and becomes dismissible. While informed consent does exist as a legal concept, it actually was founded and based upon medical ethics, making it much more an ethical matter than purely legal. Informed consent is an ethical matter because its principle is borne from the bioethical principle of autonomy. Recall our definition of informed consent that it “speaks to the idea that autonomous decisions reflect what one intends to do...” (Pedroni and Pimple 51). The definition relates informed consent to autonomy by attributing autonomous decision-making to the principle that informed consent wants to achieve. Juxtapose this definition with that of autonomy in “Principles of Biomedical Ethics” by Thomas McCormick, and the intertwined nature of informed consent and autonomy is recognized: “In health care decisions, our respect for the autonomy of the patient would, in common parlance, mean that the patient has the capacity to act intentionally, with understanding, and without controlling influences that would mitigate against a free and voluntary act” (9). In other words, autonomy seeks to enable the same qualities of autonomous decision-making that informed consent does. Through comparison, the two principles arrive at their convergence: informed consent is the practical application borne from the principle of autonomy, which promotes the ethical consideration of patient’s right to self-determination. The action of undermining informed consent, then, is a matter under ethical consideration. Thus, while neither McKusick nor Hsu were legally charged for their actions, they are nevertheless morally culpable – and their conduct of medical and ethical negligence toward the Lacks family indeed overtly wrong.
Foundational elements of informed consent alongside case examinations of McKusick and Hsu motivate a conclusion against the two researchers: that their respective actions infringed upon patient autonomy and so are medically and ethically perverse. Clarification of informed consent as an ethical principle dispels views of informed consent existing merely as a socio-legal formality: appropriately, it is determined that while McKusick and Hsu are not legally culpable, they are surely morally culpable. This determination is crucial, for in the cases of McKusick and Hsu, and to a more horrendous extent, the Nazi doctors, during which legality had not caught up with the crimes of its age, ethical acumen must step in to determine the culpability of moral transgressors and follow up with appropriate response and legislation.