---
layout: post
title: "Truth and Sensitivity in Approaching Patients"
date: 2013-02-08 14:59:01 +0000
categories: ['Philosphy']
---

**Truth and Sensitivity in Approaching Patients**
*Word Count: 1521*
The purpose of medicine is to promote the welfare of patients, and physicians possess the skills and knowledge that qualify them to carry out this purpose. At the same time, physicians are obligated, both through medical code and national interests, to respect the patient’s right to self-determination and create the conditions necessary for autonomous decision-making. Benevolent deception, the act of concealing from patients the truth that may potentially harm them, is at times appropriate, given that it is the patient’s wish or that truthfulness would bring certain disaster. Otherwise, benevolent deception precludes an adequately informed patient – crippling patient autonomy. In medicine, neither beneficence nor autonomy is expendable, and thus committing needless benevolent deception is unacceptable. The approach that avoids deception while preserving both the principle of beneficence and that of autonomy calls physicians, simply, to engage the situation with truth and sensitivity.

To promote the welfare of patients is to take after the principle of beneficence. In his publication, “Principle of Bioethics,” Thomas R. McCormick defines beneficence: “The ordinary meaning of this principle is the duty of health-care providers to be of a benefit to the patient, as well as to take positive steps to prevent and to remove harm from the patient” (12). While physicians are expected to refrain from causing harm, they also have an obligation to help their patients. When faced with a dilemma, it is within the line of duty to weigh and balance the possible benefits against the possible risks of an action. Treating a patient with defibrillation, for example, requires that the doctor risk bodily harm to the patient in exchange for saving the patient’s life.
In the context of clinical ethics, respecting the patient’s right to self-determination is enabling patient autonomy. Our respect for autonomy, as McCormick explains, “would in common practice, mean that the patient has the capacity to act intentionally, with understanding, and without controlling influences that would mitigate against a free and voluntary act” (9). As clarified here, autonomy in medicine is not simply acquiescing to the patient’s every whim decision. It involves acquainting the patient with all treatment options, adequately informing the patient of all risks and side effects, and confirming that the patient understands and agrees to all operations before proceeding.
The physician’s major requirement in respecting patient autonomy is to create conditions necessary for decision-making within the patient. Autonomous decision-making exists when the patient is calm, informed, and mentally enabled to make decisions. Physicians carefully explain the situation to patients, assuage emotions that may interfere with the patient’s ability to reason, and offer suggestions when the patient’s choices disrupt their health. In other words, truthfulness and sensitivity are integral in creating conditions necessary for autonomy. This leads us to address the role of deception.
Deception, even benevolent, of the clear-headed and receptive patient undermines the keystone of patient autonomy. Here clear-headed and receptive are the operative words. Before we proceed with why benevolent deception is generally unacceptable, let us first examine the two cases when benevolent deception is acceptable. If truthfulness would bring certain disaster or the situation is given that the patient wishes not to be told, then benevolent deception is permissible. For example, the patient who is not clear-headed, say, emotionally volatile, may at the time necessitate benevolent deception. This does not go against patient autonomy because the patient would not be classified under calm or mentally enabled to make decisions. Similarly, if the patient demonstrates or responds in ways that substantiates a wish not to be informed of a certain truth, then the principle of patient autonomy supports corresponding service of benevolent deception. Medical Ethicist Daniel K. Sokol proposes this specific situation in his publication, “Truth Telling in the doctor patient relationship: a case analysis,” when he suggests, “[a]sking patients early on in the doctor-patient relationship how much they would like to know is one way to tailor information to the preferences of individual patients” (25).  Should the patient prefer delusion to reality, then benevolent deception would maintain patient autonomy and bear permissibility. These two specific exemptions considered, we now turn toward general medical practice, within which benevolent deception undermines clinical ethics and is unacceptable.
Benevolent deception often operates under the guise of nonmaleficence: do no harm. While the act strikes no immediate damage, long-term, it is likely to impair the patient from making an adequately informed decision. The impairment of patient autonomy is blatant in the case of Henrietta Lacks. Iterated in The Immortal Life of Henrietta Lacks, a doctor’s note in Lacks’s medical record regarding her hysterectomy reads, “Told she could not have any more children. Says if she had been told so before, she would not have gone through with treatment” (Skloot 38). A hysterectomy is an exceptionally taxing operation that includes loss of the reproductive function, therefore an operation to discuss in great detail and at great length with the patient. That Lacks was not adequately informed of the procedure before medical personnel operated on her draws the implication that, as a way to maintain and ease Henrietta’s compliance, medical personnel had withheld information on risks of the operation from her. This act of benevolent deception resulted in the loss of both Henrietta's autonomy and the biological gift that she holds dear: birthing children. Had this situation been approached differently, Henrietta’s impaired autonomy, deferred shock at the irreconcilable situation, and feeling of betrayal could have been altogether averted. A more honorable alternative to benevolent deception, involving candor and sympathy, is discerned in the following case of Miss P.
In many cases, benevolent deception is a superficial fix to the grave problems that would otherwise be more effectively and morally resolved through truth and sensitivity. In “Truth Telling in the doctor patient relationship: a case analysis,” the case of Miss P depicts truth and sensitivity as capable of maintaining patient autonomy in a beneficent manner. An 18 year old woman Miss P is to donate her kidney to her father. The moral dilemma unfolds when HLA testing reveals that the so-called father patient and Miss P are not genetically related (Sokol 20-21). On one hand, they do not want Miss P to renege her donor decision and disturb the lives of father and daughter; on the other, the test results are undeniably relevant to Miss P’s decision-making considerations. Resolution to this moral dilemma lies not within benevolent deception, but within autonomy and beneficence. As it turns out, “the team decided to share their unexpected finding with the patients who, although initially shocked and distressed, were grateful for the staff’s honesty. Miss P did not revoke her decision to donate the kidney” (Sokol 25).  The explicit demonstration of truth here is evident in the remark that the team communicated the test results to the patients. The implicit demonstration of sensitivity is recognizable in its follow-up, when Miss P and the father felt grateful following their initial shock. In addition, Miss P did not revoke her decision to donate the kidney, testifying to a level of finesse the team exercised in disclosing the deliberated information. With the truth, the situation turned out favorable. Had the situation not turned out as favorable, physicians should still respect the patient’s decision. Should physicians believe that the patient’s decision is misguided, gently counseling the patient is always an accessible option. In either case, both autonomy and beneficence are respected without the need for, and consequences of, benevolent deception.
In closing our argument, Roger Higgs, Chairman of the Editorial Board, Journal of Medical Ethics, lends us a hand in highlighting the roles of truth and sensitivity. We find that the general basis of arguments for benevolent deception rely on cases of emotional despair in patients who hear distressing truths, consequently deterring most medical practitioners from telling distressing truths. In “On Telling Patients the Truth,” Higgs seeks to alleviate and clarify these concerns, in addition advise remedies that are more ethical and accommodating to patients: "The style of telling could have been brutal, with no follow up or support... What these cases do, surely, is argue, not for not telling, but for better telling, for sensitivity and care in determining how much a patient wants to know, explaining carefully in ways the patient can understand, and providing full support and ‘aftercare’ as in other treatments” (18). In other words, truthfulness in respecting patient autonomy does not demand a bare-faced or brazen telling of a patient’s condition, but one that is as properly approached and attended to as any other operation taken upon a patient in the hospital. With this in mind, the truth-telling involved in patient autonomy is clarified, and the role of sensitivity underscored.
Through our discussion of benevolent deception and when it is appropriate, we examined the principles of beneficence and autonomy, the cases of Henrietta Lacks and Miss P, and relevant input from Daniel K. Sokol and Roger Higgs. The corollaries drawn from our discussion lead us toward a powerful understanding: Employing the right level of sympathy and impressionability, truth-telling can act as an appropriate substitute to benevolent deception in keeping in line with beneficence. Furthermore, through truth and sensitivity, the medical duty to uphold both beneficence and autonomy is effectively preserved.
*Personal Rating: 3/5*