---
layout: post
title: "Paintings of the Dutch Golden Age"
date: 2013-09-05 07:07:43 +0000
categories: ['Dutch Culture &amp; Language']
---

Paintings of the Dutch Golden Age
The Dutch Golden Age was an era of economic prosperity and scientific progress within the Netherlands. From the Eighty Years’ War until 1648, Dutch trade, engineering, military, and art were regarded as among the best in the world. In the presentation conducted by Professor Erlend de Groot, the painting *The Milkmaid *by Johannes Vermeer aptly depicts the characteristic genre painting popular in the Dutch Golden Age. In addition to the paintings found within Professor Groot’s presentation, *The Bend in Herengracht *by Gerrit Adriaensz Berckheyde readily reflects the celebration of naval power and water engineering ingenuity that re-claimed many Dutch lands from the sea. In this essay, a brief overview of the Dutch Golden Age shall be provided, followed by a discussion of paintings during the Golden Age, particularly *The Milkmaid *and *The Bend in Herengracht, *and topped off with a comparison between the Netherlands during the Golden Age and the Netherlands of present day.

Before discussing the paintings mentioned, a brief context on the Dutch Golden Age shall be presented. The Dutch Golden Age, broadly speaking, was the cumulative result of political triumphs, economic advantages, technological advancements, and an atmosphere of intellectual tolerance. As seen in Discovering the Dutch: On Culture and Society of the Netherlands by Emmeline BesaMusca, the independence gained from the Eighty Years’ War with Spain raised national morale (Besamusca 103). The monopoly on trade by the Dutch East India Company and Japan skyrocketed the nation’s economy. Economic and social relations with powerhouse nations such as China and Japan were strengthened, and the Dutch profited greatly from its production of Delftware, diamond cutting, sugar refining, and tobacco spinning. Also promoting economic prosperity, Dutch water engineering such as the canals and dykes were instrumental in enabling efficient trading and communication between towns in the Netherlands. Finally, the sphere of intellectual tolerance found within the Netherlands promoted the migration of influential philosophers, such as Rene Descartes, and refugees fleeing from religious persecution, many of whom were skilled craftsmen that went on to contribute to Dutch industry and art (Besamusca 106-107). In particular, the discussion of art of the Dutch Golden Age is the topic of this paper.

Paintings of the Dutch Golden Age for the most part reflect the culture of its time. In the discussion of art and culture, *The Milkmaid* and *The Bend in Herengracht* shall be examined. First off, it should be noted that paintings in the Golden Age differed starkly from those of the former ages in its refutation of religious art, church patronage, and historical paintings. The culture of intellectualism at the time steered the culture away from idol worship and toward value in the individual and the tangible world. Paintings in the Golden Age drew attention instead to still life and scenes of everyday life, also known as genre painting; landscapes and seascapes; and large group portraits of militia guilds. The emphasis on everyday life was inspired in large part by the growing number of wealthy Dutch middle class and successful mercantile patrons. The emphasis on landscapes, seascapes and militia guilds was inspired by the growing national morale of the time as well as the acclaimed naval power and water engineering ingenuity of the Dutch. In essence, paintings of the Golden Age celebrated the state of the nation during the Golden Age.

*The Milkmaid* by Johannes Vermeer is an example of how a painting of the Golden Age celebrates the state of the nation during the Golden Age. Presently housed in the Rijksmuseum, *The Milkmaid* is an oil-on-canvas painting of a house made, quite literally. It is regarded as one of the Rijksmuseum’s finest attractions. *The Milkmaid* is an archetype piece of the genre painting popular during the Dutch Golden Age. The painting depicts a very common scene. A housemaid is pouring milk into a Dutch oven on a table plated with various types of bread. There is little to no goddess-like or religious element to the painting, perhaps aside from the rich blue of her apron. The housemaid has the typical build body of a woman worker, with bulky forearms and a clear sleeve tan line. Her body dawns work clothes that are visibly weathered. *The Milkmaid* is a genre painting that, as previously mentioned, reflects the drive away from religious artwork of idol and worship toward a more subtle and casual scene of everyday life.

In a similar manner, *The Bend in Herengracht* by Gerrit Adriaensz Berckheyde reflects the Dutch Golden Age through the painting’s spotlight portrayal of the water engineering ingenuity of the Dutch. A pen-washed oil painting, *The Bend in Herengracht *depicts the prestigious Gouden Bocht, Golden Bend, of Herengracht, Amsterdam. Much thanks to the sophisticated pen-washed technique by Berckheyde and the opulent homes on either sides of the bend, the painting exudes a fresh and celebratory feel. *The Bend in Herengracht* highlights one of the Netherland’s most prized and famous form of integration of water and land – the canal. The canals in their own right were able to reclaim from the North Sea much of the once lost lands of the Dutch. *The Bend in Herengracht *pays due tribute to the water engineering ingenuity of the Dutch.

*The Milkmaid* specifically is my favorite painting from the presentation by Professor Groot because of the cultural and stylistic elements it elegantly portrays. Culturally, *The Milkmaid *off the bat depicts the squat earthenware container that is typically known as the Dutch oven; various kinds of bread that is common of the Dutch diet; and Cupid to suggest an atmosphere of love or sex, an element typical of Dutch maid and kitchen paintings. Stylistically, *The Milkmaid *possesses a great deal of definition; that is, the brightness depicted from outside the window does not fade the detail and grainy quality of the bread, in particular. In addition, the soft lighting yields a low highlight effect, exuding a soft and weighty, almost grave atmosphere. The mental deliberation between whether the woman is exerting concentration or simply daydreaming engages the audience well. The liquid element of the milk in the center gives a nice fresh quality to a painting that would otherwise be too grave and rigid without it.

*The Bend in Herengracht *is a painting that I did not experience in the presentation by Professor Groot but that I had seen in the Rijksmuseum and find suitable to have in the presentation, should the presentation need to be extended. In other words, the presentation as is I already find comprehensive just enough and in-depth just enough. For purposes of the prompt however, I sought out a type of painting that was not as covered as much as the others and that I found aesthetically pleasing. *The Bend in Herengracht *I find important because I believe the canals and dyke and general water management system in the Netherlands should be well pronounced and praised. The ingenuity behind transforming swamp and marsh to the robust nation the Netherlands is today cannot be over-hyped enough. While the Dutch are efficient traders, strong in naval power, and relatively economically prosperous people, I find the water engineering to trump all in terms of beauty, skill, and importance. Without proper water engineering, the nation would not exist half as it is today. In addition, the elegance with which water and land are integrated is perhaps the most aesthetically pleasing experience to almost any beholder. Finally, the skill behind water engineering is both technical and innovative – and capturing that sense in a painting immortalizes the deed. Overall, I enjoy *The Bend in Herengracht* as well as see it to be a good supplement to Professor Groot’s already comprehensive presentation.

In summary, the Dutch Golden Age filtered out the religious-centered style of art and church patronage in favor for a more secular and everyday centered style of art. Paintings during the Dutch Golden Age celebrated the developments of society: military, economic, social, and technological. *The Milkmaid* is a secular genre painting that was inspired by a less religious-oriented and more social middle-class driven society. *The Bend in Herengracht*, similarly, illuminates the engineering genius of the Dutch. Both paintings are now housed in the Rijksmuseum for the present-day society to appreciate.

Forward to the present-day, while the Dutch Golden Age is referred to have ended in 1648, the fundamental state of Dutch society has in large part remained. Today, the House of Orange – Nassau that was founded by William of Orange at the end of Spanish Rule still remains (Besamusca 103). Technologically, the Dutch have actually improved their water engineering, making news worldwide off its model of flood prevention and management of a high and unrivaled quality of water (“Lessons for U.S. From a Flood-Prone Lane”). The Dutch still to the present day exhibit a level of legislative tolerance, although that the intellectual tolerance of the Golden Age is mostly widespread now within developed nations. Socially, the disparity between upper and lower classes within the Netherlands is small, with the nation comprising largely of a social middle-class. Thus, while the Dutch Golden Age is agreed upon by historians to have ended in 1678, after the Franco-Dutch War that caused Netherlands to fall into debt to England (“Dutch War”), many fundamental aspects of Dutch society have remained to this day.
Works Cited
Besamusca, Emmeline, and Jaap Verheul. *Discovering the Dutch*. Amsterdam: Amsterdam UP, 2010. Print.

"Dutch War (1672-78)." *Encyclopedia Britannica Online*. Encyclopedia Britannica, n.d. Web. 03 Sept. 2013.

Higgins, Andrew. "Lessons for U.S. From a Flood-Prone Land." *The New York Times*. The New York Times, 14 Nov. 2012. Web. 4 Sept. 2013.