---
layout: post
title: "Nurturing Interactions: Patients, Researchers, and Healthcare Providers"
date: 2013-03-15 16:57:48 +0000
categories: ['Philosphy']
---

**Nurturing Interactions: Patients, Researchers, and Healthcare Providers**
*Word Count: 1892*
The aim of medicine is to develop a fair and feasible system of health care. To meet the aim, medical professionals need to promote research, for research is the vehicle of innovation that provides the medical tools and procedures necessary to improve upon health care for the public. The advancement of scientific research, in turn, is fueled by the contribution of biological materials from patients and the development of existing procedures from other researchers. Accordingly, to promote scientific research, medical professionals need to encourage participation from patients and interactions among research communities and healthcare providers. Both implementing informed consent and designating price ceilings for patents are actions that steer toward greater participation from patients and increased interactions among researchers and healthcare providers. Thus, medical professionals, along with the United States legislature, need to implement informed consent and designate price ceilings for patents so that the nation can provide for a fair and feasible system of healthcare.

Through promoting research, medical professionals can develop a fair and feasible system of healthcare. Medical professionals are responsible for upholding the ethics of their profession, and a fair and feasible system of healthcare would uphold the bioethical principle of justice. Defined by Thomas McCormick in the "Principle of Biomedical Ethics," “[j]ustice in health care is usually defined as a form of fairness, or as Aristotle once said, ‘giving to each that which is his due’” (13). Developing a fair system of healthcare means to “provide some decent minimum level of health care for all citizens, regardless of ability to pay,” (McCormick 13). In a similar manner, a feasible system of health care means to ensure that medical tools are accessible, so that those tools can be provided for the public. To meet the healthcare obligations of fairness and feasibility, medical professionals need to promote research, since research has developed vaccines, formed tests for cancer, and is primarily the vehicle for future medical innovation. Because research is foundational to developing a fair and feasible system of health care, medical professionals need to make the decisions that promote research.
Implementing informed consent is one of the two pivotal actions discussed in this paper that promotes research, and as a result, allows the United States to provide for a fair and feasible system of healthcare. Implementing informed consent is pivotal because it nurtures within patients a comfortable level of trust to provide biological materials to researchers for the benefit of medical research. Informed consent, as defined by medical ethicists Julia Pedroni and Kenneth Pimple, “speaks to the idea that autonomous decisions reflect what one intends to do” (51). The aim of informed consent is to allow individuals to make self-determined decisions. Medical professionals meet the aim through the following processes: informing the patients, confirming their understanding, discerning their voluntariness, and enabling their decision-making (Pedroni and Pimple 49-51).
Some may argue that the first process, informing patients, is practically impossible and dismiss informed consent altogether. But the argument and its dismissal are overly simplified, since informed consent does not actually require that every fact be told. Instead, informed consent seeks to convey only reasonably adequate information to patients. As Roger Higgs clarifies in his seminal paper “On Telling Patients The Truth,” “The whole truth may be impossible to attain, but truthfulness is not” (16). Practically, this means medical professionals can inform patients on some level of relevance, let it be of standard professional, reasonable, or subjective. The professional standard provides information that is typically provided by professionals; the reasonable, information that is relevant to a “thoughtful layperson;” and the subjective, information that is considered relevant to the person who is making the decision (Pedroni and Pimple 49-50).
In upholding fairness, medical researchers need to be mindful of the different kinds of patients present and cater relevance with respect to the level of understanding in the target population. For example, in the case of the Lackses, who were informed inappropriately of their researcher’s intent, due process of informed consent was undermined, leaving the family in the dark and distrustful about what was going on with their blood samples. Dr. Susan Hsu phoned the family and explained her intentions using the professional standard of relevance, “[w]e come to draw blood to get HLA antigen, we do genetic marker profile because we can deduce a lot of Henrietta Lacks genotype from the children and the husband” (Skloot 132). Hsu used words like HLA antigen, genetic marker profile, and genotype in her explanation, not even remotely close to layperson terms. In addition, Hsu did not ask the patient for questions or explain further, dismissing the subjective and reasonable standards of relevance. Considering that the Lackses are a small plantation family, it is safe to assume that they misunderstood what Hsu had said. Had Hsu done her research or inquired on the patients’ understanding, she would realize that she needed to instead employ the reasonable and subject standards of relevance.
Interviewing the family years after the incident, Mike Rogers remarks, “The Lacks family truly had no idea what was going on, and they really wanted to understand. But doctors just took blood samples without explaining anything and left the family worrying” (Skloot 139). Because researchers employed an inappropriate standard of informing patients, members of Lacks family were misled to believe that they were being tested for cancer, when really their blood samples were being used for research that did not directly help the family.
In general, undermining any of the aforementioned processes of informed consent may mislead, even manipulate, patients and patient decision-making, likely resulting in patients becoming distrustful of the offending medical professionals. As Skloot reveals, “Deborah started wondering if instead of testing the Lacks children for cancer, McKusick and Hsu were actually injecting them with the same bad blood that had killed their mother” (Skloot 135). Researchers not informing Deborah Lacks or answering her questions bred paranoia and confusion within her, leading her to distrust the researchers. In consequence, Higgs reasons, “If trust is gradually corroded, if the ‘wells are poisoned,’ progress is hard” (18). Referring to patients as the wells of science, Higgs warns that patient distrust would frustrate medical progress. Specifically, continued neglect of informed consent is likely to breed distrust and discourage patient participation, leading to a decline in patients’ contributions of biological materials for research. Corroborating Higgs’s warning, Kathy Hudson remarks on the state of public feelings, “I could see people starting to say, ‘No, you can’t take my tissues” (Skloot 231). Perceivably, unless researchers begin properly informing and obtaining consent from patients, patients will be discouraged from donating biological materials to scientific research.
Tending to informed consent, then, aids greatly in nurturing the trust and patient participation that motivates scientific research. Therefore, to advocate the advancement of medical research that is necessary to better the United States’ healthcare system, medical professionals must implement relevant and appropriate informed consent.
The second pivotal action is to designate price ceilings for patents, so to promote interactions between researchers and healthcare providers and allow the United States to provide for a fair and feasible system of healthcare. The United States needs to designate price ceilings to curb against licensing fees that are too high. High licensing fees hinder research that involve patented processes and prevents vital medical processes and tools from being accessible to public health care. To uphold fairness and feasibility in the healthcare system, the United States must ensure that helpful medical tools may neither to be kept a secret from the public nor priced too high.
The abuse of licensing fees for patents is evident in the case of Myriad Genetics; from Skloot’s research, it is found that “Myriad Genetics, which holds the patents on the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes responsible for most cases of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer, charges $3,000 to test for the genes” (Skloot 236). A molecular diagnostic testing company, Myriad Genetics patented two vital testing processes, forming a monopoly, and then set its charges inaccessibly high. In addition, Skloot remarks, “Among other things, scientists involved in the case claim that the practice of gene patenting has inhibited their research, and they aim to stop it” (Skloot 236). Because the steep licensing fees prevented scientists from referring to important patented processes and tools, scientists felt that their research was hindered. Considering that scientific research is the reason patients with otherwise fatal conditions can be tested, treated, and cured, the United States must regard research as priority.
While it may be argued that controlling licensing fees will deter incentive to conduct scientific research and develop useful medical processes, simply setting a price ceiling should curb only against financial abuse, meanwhile leave a reasonable level of profit to still be gained. In the bigger scheme of matters, it is ironically counterproductive that the financial gains to create incentive for scientific research should simultaneously hinder scientific research; thus, to be effective, the incentive process necessitates a price ceiling for patents.
To promote research then, the United States needs to set price ceilings for patents to defend against exploitations similar to those of Myriad Genetics for succeeding generations. For, in addition to hindering research, the consequences of patent abuse can even extend directly into healthcare: “At that rate, it would cost anywhere from $46.4 million (for academic institutions) to $464 million (for commercial labs) to test one person for all known genetic diseases” (Skloot 237). These costs make it impossible for healthcare to be fair and feasible. With the general patenting term lasting 20 years, it would be at least another 20 years before the helpful, even vital, medical processes that researchers have already developed reach public health care.
Myriad Genetics obstructed circulation between helpful research and public health care, only allowing use of the company’s patented tools to those who can afford the unnecessarily steep costs. As already explained, justice seeks to provide a fair and feasible system of healthcare; such a system cannot exist if the cost of licensing for patented medical process is inaccessibly high. Because the financial abuses of licensing fees preclude a feasible system of public health care, such abuses are unjust. In pursuit of fairness, the United States needs to curb against such abuse. Through designating feasible price ceilings for patents, the United States legislature can improve interactions and health care delivery between researchers, medical institutions, and healthcare providers, enabling better research opportunities and more accessible and up-to-date healthcare.
Implementing appropriate process of informed consent and designating feasible price ceilings for patents are actions necessary to advance scientific research and develop a fair and feasible system of healthcare in the United States. Implementing appropriate process of informed consent nurtures the trust necessary for the advancement of science. According to warnings and remarks by Higgs and Hudson, continued neglect of informed consent is apt to discourage patient trust and participation, leading to a resistance that is detrimental to research innovation. As well, designating feasible price ceilings for patents will prevent against the financial exploitation that obstructs accessible healthcare. The case of Myriad Genetics demonstrated how inaccessibly high licensing fees hindered research development that involved patented processes and prevented helpful medical tools from being accessible to public health care. Thus in order to nurture the patient participation and research interactions necessary for medical innovation and the development of a fair and feasible system of healthcare, the United States must make it a priority to implement relevant and appropriate informed consent and designate feasible price ceilings for patents.