---
layout: post
title: "Economic Equilibrium: The Imperative For Foreign Aid"
date: 2014-02-25 23:37:06 +0000
categories: ['Philosphy']
---

Kimberly Nguyen
Professor Lamey
Phil 27
24 February 2014
Economic Equilibrium: The Imperative For Foreign Aid
From the American perspective, as we currently stand, the United States gives not only much less than citizens perceive but is also running far behind on foreign aid as compared with that of other developed nations. According to 2012 statistics from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Ireland and Belgium gave more than twice as much as the United States, Denmark four times as much, and Sweden and Luxembourg fivefold (Singer). Culturally, Americans are particularly individualistic and more ignorant of global situations than citizens of other developed nations. Thus, there are arguments – while not specific to the United States, is nonetheless pronounced here – that curb the growth of foreign aid given to countries in need. The arguments are: it is not any sort of duty to alleviate the poor, but rather it is a privileged act of charity by those who can afford it; and that foreign aid does not actually help as much as it can and therefore we should not contribute too much, perhaps even lessen the amount we devote to, foreign aid. In this paper, a response to these arguments will be made by an active appeal to Peter Singer, a prominent moral philosopher. Singer argues that a fair and rational moral code actually obligates us to give, rather than merely praise giving, and that it is our duty to earnestly improve our methods of providing foreign aid, rather than drop it altogether simply because we may see the current system as inefficient.
Should we analyze Peter Singer’s claim in “Famine, Affluence, and Morality” that it is moral obligation to prevent something bad from happening, without thereby sacrificing anything of comparable moral importance, and find that the claim is logically sound, then it necessarily follows that the traditional distinction between duty and charity cannot be drawn – or must be shifted, so what we currently perceive as charity becomes redefined and treated as moral duty. In support of these conclusions, I will provide within this essay an outline of the traditional distinction between duty and charity, an in-depth analysis of Singer’s claim of moral obligation and its objections, and an examination of the consequent shift in traditionally defined distinction between duty and charity. As well, I will propose a viable plan of action in accordance with Singer’s claim as applicable to the circumstance of foreign aid.

Traditionally, duty is moral action whose performance is not praiseworthy and whose omission is condemnable. Charity, on the other hand, is moral action whose performance is praiseworthy and whose omission is not condemnable. For example, giving money to the the Bengal relief fund is conventionally regarded as an act of charity (Aiken and LaFollette 27). Thus, because giving money to the Bengal relief fund is regarded as an act of charity, there is praise for giving money and simultaneously nothing wrong with not giving money. What is not praiseworthy, however, and is in fact condemnable in our society should we act otherwise, is not killing others. Not killing others, not lying, not stealing, and so forth, are regarded as duty (Aiken and LaFollette 28-29). Duty, as we had mentioned, is traditionally not praiseworthy and whose omission is condemnable. In other words, the distinction between duty and charity is that while duty is obligated, charity is not. Actions of duty are morally demanded, but actions of charity is praised, as it is considered to go beyond the minimum level of obligation – beyond the call of duty.
Singer’s argument follows logically from two assumptions that he takes. The first assumption is that suffering and death from lack of food, shelter, and medical care are bad. Although Singer intentionally avoids relating the assumption to moral philosophies like utilitarianism, deontology, and the like, it soon enough becomes clear that should we apply most well-founded ethic systems, we would reach the conclusion that suffering and death from lack of food, shelter, and medical care are bad. Thus, his assumption is generally sound. Singer’s second assumption claims that intuitively, if we are walking past a shallow pond and see a child drowning in it, we ought to wade in and rescue the child. This would result in incurring mud upon our clothes, but this result is insignificant, while the death of the child is significant and clearly bad (Aiken and LaFollette 25). Through this intuition, Singer forms the claim of moral obligation that if it is our power to prevent some absolute bad from happening, without thereby sacrificing anything of comparable moral importance, than we ought, morally, to do so (Aiken and LaFollette 24). In other words, if we can alleviate suffering and bad in the world without incurring comparable costs, we are morally obligated to do so.
Now, there does exist the objection that Singer’s argument does not align with how we normatively view morality.  Singer acknowledges, “People do not ordinarily judge in the way I have suggested they should” (Aiken and LaFollette 28). Here, Singer makes it clear that he indeed understands that his moral code is not the current standard of moral ethics within general societies. But in response, Singer makes it a point that normative judgement does not dictate rationality or morality. He suggests that the discrepancy between his moral code and that of his society is not of logic, but of cultural constraints and beliefs about human capability. There is the argument by some writers, such as Sidgwick and Urmson, that we need to have a basic moral code which “is not too far beyond the capacities of the ordinary man, for otherwise there will be a general breakdown of compliance with the moral code” (Aiken and LaFollette 29). Put simply, if the standards of a moral code is beyond human capability, it is unlikely that the moral code is followed in practice. For example, if I command a fellow someone not to blackmail, then that someone is likely to follow the code, as it is easy – due to lack of constant, pressing social temptations. But if I take the code further and command the same someone not to blackmail as well as to provide for famine relief fifty-percent of their income, it is unlikely that the someone will follow the code, as it is difficult – due to the constant, pressing social temptation to hold onto income and luxury. Consequently, that someone may disregard the moral code altogether. For this reason, Singer believes that the current normative moral code is the way it is. However, this does not mean that the moral code ought to be the way that it currently stands, nor does it imply that the moral code is optimal the way it currently stands. Instead, social temptations must be altered so that indeed humans are capable of the moral code that ought to be.
Having examined why the normative moral code is different from Singer’s moral code, there still exists the objection that Singer’s moral code is not one that can be put into practice. Singer remarks, “Given a society in which a wealthy man who gives 5 percent of his income to famine relief is regarded as most generous, it is not surprising that a proposal that we all ought to give away half of our incomes will be thought to be absurdly unrealistic” (Aiken and LaFollette 29). An explanation for the current normative judgement by Singer is that because we do not believe that we should be giving so much to famine relief, it is absurdly unrealistic to expect us to give so much to famine relief. And the reason we do not believe we should be giving so much to famine relief is simply due to others not giving so much to famine relief. We do that which is expected of us. In which case, it is precisely the fact that we do not view moral obligation under Singer’s code that we do not act in the manner prescribed by Singer’s conclusion: that if it is our power to prevent some absolute bad from happening, without thereby sacrificing anything of comparable moral importance, than we ought, morally, to do so. Should society at large be convinced of this moral code and act upon it more readily, it is likely that ensuing societies will perpetuate Singer’s moral code.
In consideration of Singer’s claim as it stands, it becomes evident that a shift has occurred in the traditionally defined sense of duty. Singer puts forth that a consequence of his claim is such that “our traditional moral categories are upset” (Aiken and LaFollette 27). No longer considered an act of charity, giving to the Bengal relief fund and the like is, under the moral code by Singer, morally obligated, and thus a duty. There is a shift in the definition of duty; consequently, there must also be a shift in the definition of charity, if we must redraw the distinction rather than abolishing it altogether. As Singer iterates, “...We ought to give money away, and it is wrong not to do so” (Aiken and LaFollette 27). Here he has shifted what was once an act of charity, giving money, to an act of duty. It is no longer a praiseworthy act whose omission is not condemnable, but now an act whose performance is not praiseworthy and whose omission is indeed condemnable. As to whether the distinction should be redrawn or abolished is not within the scope of Singer’s argument. He does offer, however, that one of the possible many ways to draw out the distinction would be to decide that “it is good to make other people as happy as possible, but not wrong to do so” (Aiken and LaFollette 28). As such, charity would be considered going out of our way to make someone happier – even if that someone else was not suffering in the first place.
In any case, the bottom-line is if it within our power to prevent some absolute bad from happening, without thereby sacrificing anything of comparable moral importance, than we ought, morally, to do so. Applying this to the situation of foreign aid, then, our plan of action has three steps. Investing time, energy, resources and capital to improving method aid is the first step. The second simultaneously step is to convince society at large, even if slowly, of the moral code proposed by Singer, that indeed it is our moral duty to alleviate as much of the absolute bad as we can, to the point that we sacrifice nothing of comparable moral importance. The third and final step is delivery of that aid so that, indeed, some absolute bad in the world is prevented, mitigated, and resolved in accordance with Singer’s moral code. An inefficient or counterproductive foreign aid system is not a legitimate reason to not provide aid, as that plan of action in no way comes any closer to the moral code than providing funds to a foreign aid system that may be inefficient or counterproductive. If it s a population problem, then we must establish population control programs or pressure nations to handle their problems from within. If it is a corrupt middle-management problem, then reformation of the system must be sought out. The plan of action in harmony with Singer’s moral code is indeed to improve the system, to contribute, and to deliver to those in need.
Overall, through premise analysis of Peter Singer’s claim and its consequences on the distinction between duty and charity, I have found that indeed the distinction between duty and charity has been redefined. In addition, by responding to the objections raised toward Singer’s argument and through formulating a plan of action based on Singer’s argument, I was able to ascertain the validity of Singer’s moral code as well as its potential applications with regard to foreign aid and providing for an overall more moral world.
Works Cited
Aiken, William, and Hugh LaFollette. "‘Famine, Affluence and Morality’." World Hunger and
Moral Obligation. 1st ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1977. 22-37. Print.
Singer, Peter. "Heartwarming Causes Are Nice, but Let's Give to Charity with Our Heads." The
Washington Post. The Washington Post, 21 Dec. 2013. Web. 25 Feb. 2014.