---
layout: post
title: "Evaluating North: Utilitarianism and Deontology"
date: 2014-01-30 17:44:13 +0000
categories: ['Philosphy']
---

Kimberly Nguyen
Professor Lamey
Ethics & Society
29 January 2014
Evaluating North: Utilitarianism and Deontology
Utilitarianism and deontology are each moral theories that attempt to systemize right and wrong conduct. In this sense, the superior moral theory ought to be the one that is better at discerning right and wrong as well as guiding moral agents toward good conduct. Superiority defined in this way, I argue that deontology is superior to utilitarianism. Deontology enables the premeditated discernment of right and wrong, while right and wrong by utilitarianism can only be precisely determined after the fact. Whereas utilitarianism justifies, deontology guides; and in this sense, deontology is a stronger moral compass.

Utilitarianism is a form of consequentialism, with its ethical position based on the outcomes of the action in moral question (Driver). Whether an act is right or wrong is measured by how much good toward the majority results (Mill, 123). The Greatest Happiness Principle stands at the center of utilitarianism, dictating that right necessarily follows from the action that produces the most good for the most people (Mill, 118-119). For example, should a shooter take hostage and use the hostage as a human shield, utilitarians assert that we ought to take a chance and kill the human shield to save the potentially many other lives whom the shooter could have killed.
Deontology contrasts utilitarianism in its non-consequentialist approach. The ethical position of deontology is rooted in principles, or rules, which govern the action in moral question. The principles of Kantian ethics, a prominent subset of deontology, are universability and goodness of will (Shafer-Landau, 102-105). These principles are encompassed in the categorical imperative, Kant’s formulation and method of evaluating motivations for action. The formulation states that the morally good action is one that treats rational agents as ends in themselves, not as means, and would not contradict itself should it become a universal law of nature (Shafer-Landau, 108-110). For example, breaking a promise would be morally wrong, since if we treat rational agents as ends in themselves – equal to us – we would have to be able to reasonably suppose that promise-breaking may become universal law; however, if promise-breaking became a universal law, promises would be regarded as meaningless, and therefore produce a contradiction (Shafer-Landau, 106-108). On the other hand, telling the truth is morally right, since truth-telling can become a universal law without contradiction.
In situations like war, where a large number of people are involved, utilitarianism is adept at justifying the actions that result in greater benefit than costs incurred. If a thousand people would be saved by the killing of one, it is human intuition to sacrifice the one. Through animal kingdom history, it is commonplace to find a pack leave behind the one or few who cannot keep up or is luring predators that put the majority at risk. However, utilitarianism is limited in that sense. In microscale cases, utilitarianism falls apart. If there were four patients in need of organs and one patient who possessed all the necessary organs, killing that one patient intuitively feels wrong. The general reasoning is that, as the number of people saved approaches the number of people lost, the task of weighing benefits and costs becomes ever more difficult. Analysis of potential consequences and whether they align with the Greatest Happiness Principle is no longer clear, and the right and wrong courses of action become indistinguishable.
In everyday individual situations, such as the hospital setting, deontology discerns right and wrong better and acts as a clearer guide toward good conduct. Kantian ethics says to treat rational agents as ends in themselves and not merely as means (Shafer-Landau, 108-110). Therefore, the hospital using the one patient to save the other four is clearly morally wrong under deontology. Intent and respect toward rational agents as ends in themselves are both evaluations that can be precisely premeditated. Deontology provides a framework that enables moral agents to act in such a way that is surely toward good conduct. Under utilitarianism, however, measurement of morality cannot be precisely premeditated: before committing the action, the long-term consequences of such an operation is unclear. The deontological method of evaluating right and wrong is absolute and clearly distinguishable in microscale cases, while the utilitarian method must weigh in the consequences of an action, consequences that are difficult to discern premeditatively and, in microscale cases, difficult to evaluate by the Greatest Happiness Principle, even after the fact.
Given that deontology places more emphasis on precise premeditated reasoning and universability, some may argue that it cannot be applied to large-scale and desperate matters like war and national survival. The bombing of Hiroshima, for example, is argued by absolute utilitarians to have been moral, since it forced Japan to surrender and end a war that killed millions and could have killed millions more. But under the Double Doctrine Effect – the tenant of deontology that states an action is immoral if it intends a bad action as a means to achieve a good action – the bombing of Hiroshima is immoral (McIntyre). In the bombing of Hiroshima, the killing of innocents was used as a means, rather than existing merely as a side effect, to achieve the Japanese surrender. That is not to say, however, that deontology provides no solutions to the desperate situation. Indeed, deontologists would probably propose that decision-makers instead have played more militaristically. It is deontologically permissible, under the Double Doctrine Effect, to have bombed a military target, even if a comparable number of people would have died as a result – so as long as the deaths were a side effect, and not a means of achieving the good.
Through analysis of the frameworks by which deontology and utilitarianism evaluate morality, I find that the deontological approach allows for premeditated determination of morality, whereas utilitarianism can only ballpark the potential goodness or badness of an action, with those ballpark estimations of good and bad as indistinguishable on the microscale level. In addition, a set of complications exist: who is to say which good and bad consequences resulted from whose actions, and what determines the statute of limitations on the evaluation of an action? The utilitarian approach toward moral evaluation is shaky, like a vacillating compass unsure of where north lies – its needle steadying only after that north has been reached and passed. With the superior moral system defined as one that can determine right and wrong as well as guide moral agents toward good conduct, deontology comes out on top.
Works Cited
Driver, Julia. "The History of Utilitarianism." Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Stanford University, 27 Mar. 2009. Web. 29 Jan. 2014.
McIntyre, Alison, "Doctrine of Double Effect." Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Stanford University, n.d. Web. 30 Jan. 2014.
Mill, John Stuart. On Liberty and Utilitarianism. London: David Campbell, 1992. 117-36. Print.
Shafer-Landau, Russ. "The Good Will and the Categorical Imperative, Immanuel Kant." The Ethical Life: Fundamental Readings in Ethics and Moral Problems. New York: Oxford UP, 2010. 102-13. Print.